800017
research-article2018
                       APRXXX10.1177/1532673X18800017American Politics ResearchAcree et al.


                                                Research Article
                                                                                                                       American Politics Research
                                                                                                                                              ﻿1­–33
                                                Etch-a-Sketching:                                                           © The Author(s) 2018
                                                                                                                           Article reuse guidelines:
                                                Evaluating the Post-                                          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                                                                                             DOI: 10.1177/1532673X18800017
                                                                                                          https://doi.org/10.1177/1532673X18800017
                                                Primary Rhetorical                                                journals.sagepub.com/home/apr

                                                Moderation Hypothesis


                                                Brice D.L. Acree1, Justin H. Gross2, Noah A. Smith3,
                                                Yanchuan Sim4, and Amber E. Boydstun5


                                                Abstract
                                                Candidates have incentives to present themselves as strong partisans in
                                                primary elections, and then move “toward the center” upon advancing to
                                                the general election. Yet, candidates also face incentives not to flip-flop on
                                                their policy positions. These competing incentives suggest that candidates
                                                might use rhetoric to seem more partisan in the primary and more moderate
                                                in the general, even if their policy positions remain fixed. We test this idea by
                                                measuring ideological moderation in presidential campaign language. Using a
                                                supervised two-stage text analysis model, we find evidence that presidential
                                                candidates in 2008 and 2012 use more ideologically extreme language during
                                                primary campaigns, and then moderate their tone when shifting to the general
                                                election, with troubling implications for representation and accountability.

                                                Keywords
                                                political communication, ideology, presidential campaigning, text analysis


                                                1The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA
                                                2University of Massachusetts, Amherst, USA
                                                3University of Washington, Seattle, USA
                                                4Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
                                                5University of California, Davis, USA


                                                Corresponding Author:
                                                Justin H. Gross, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 200 Hicks Way, Thompson Hall 320,
                                                Amherst, MA 01003, USA.
                                                Email: jhgross@umass.edu


2                                                     American Politics Research 00(0)

     Fugelsang: It’s fair to say that John McCain was a considerably more moderate
     candidate than the ones Governor Romney faces now. Is there concern that the
     pressure from Santorum and Gingrich might force the governor to move so far
     to the right it would hurt him with moderate voters in the general election?

     Fehrnstrom: Well, I think you hit a reset button for the fall campaign. Everything
     changes. It’s almost like an Etch-A-Sketch. You can kind of shake it up and
     restart all over again.


    —Eric Fehrnstrom, Spokesman for presidential candidate Mitt Romney, questioned
                   by John Fugelsang on CNN during the 2012 presidential primaries.


Introduction
Conventional wisdom suggests that candidates should present themselves as
strong partisans in primary elections, and then move “toward the center” upon
advancing to the general election. Eric Fehrnstrom, in his candid comment
above, offered after candidate Mitt Romney won the Illinois primary in 2012,
simply provided a metaphor for a phenomenon politicos have long assumed to
be true. Informal Google searches for “tack toward the center” or “flip-flop
primary general” return thousands of news stories and blog posts about candidates, at all levels of government and spanning decades, undergoing similar
metamorphoses: appealing to party diehards in primary elections before
attempting to appear centrist when campaigning in the general election.
   Yet this hypothesized phenomenon of post-primary moderation is
directly at odds with the incentives candidates face not to flip-flop by
changing their issue positions. Thus, on one hand, we should expect candidates to tack toward the center following the primary election, while on the
other hand, we should expect candidates to maintain a set of stable positions. We argue that these expectations can be reconciled by considering
that candidates can use rhetoric to appeal first to their base during the primary, then to more centrist voters during the general, all while maintaining
essentially static policy views.
   We refer colloquially to this expectation—that candidates shift from using
more partisan rhetoric in the primary election to more centrist rhetoric in the
general election—as the “Etch-a-Sketch”1 hypothesis. If true, it has important implications, as electoral representation and accountability are crucial
for democracy (Powell, 2000). If candidates do indeed choose language to
appeal to different types of voters at each stage of the election, it suggests that
during either the primary or the general election—or both—candidates are
presenting a less-than-accurate version of themselves to voters; a wolf in


Acree et al.                                                                   3

sheep’s clothing, as it were. Thus, to the extent that voters’ perceptions can be
shaped by a politician’s rhetoric—and research shows that they can be
(Druckman & Holmes, 2004; Nelson, 2004)—the rhetoric candidates use to
portray themselves as more or less partisan or more or less radical than they
really are hinders voters’ abilities to make informed choices about which candidate would best represent them and, moreover, which inferred promises
candidates will be accountable for once elected.
   To date, researchers have addressed the question of whether candidates
“tack toward the center” by examining whether candidates change their policy stances, and find only modest degrees of moderation (Burden, 2001,
2004). These findings make sense in light of the notion that it should be electorally costly for candidates to “flip-flop” on policy positions, which are easy
to compare over the course of a campaign. Yet such findings would appear to
contradict the game theoretic expectation—supported by anecdotes such as
Fehrnstrom’s statement—that strategic candidates are those who find a way
to start out more partisan or ideologically extreme during the primary, then
become in some sense more moderate during the general election. Our study
unifies the formal theoretic and empirical expectations of candidate behavior.
We contend that scholars have overlooked perhaps the most fruitful and least
risky manner in which candidates may signal moderation: changing rhetoric.
Language is a powerful political tool. Through rhetoric, candidates can play
to the particular audience at hand—the ideological base during the primary,
the median voter during the general—without shifting positions.
   Our theory of rhetorical moderation seeks to establish three points: (a)
Candidates have an incentive to appear more moderate in general elections
than in primary elections; (b) rhetoric affords a means to create and sustain a
more moderate appearance without the risk of looking like a “flip-flopper”;
and (c) candidates systematically change their rhetoric in transitioning from
the primary to the general election. In the sections to follow, we explore these
points and mobilize a large corpus of political rhetoric to illustrate our theory
at work in recent presidential campaigns. To preview the findings, we show
that presidential candidates do in fact use more ideologically extreme language in primary elections before moving rhetorically toward the center in
the general elections.

Theory
Incentives for Moderation
Convergence theory starts from a basic premise, formalized by Hotelling
(1929), Black (1948), and Downs (1957), concerning the median voter model


4                                              American Politics Research 00(0)

for majority decision making. We begin by imagining voters scattered along
a single dimensional space which may represent “ideal points,” broadly
defined as political ideology, policy preference, or some other criterion. If
voters possess single-peaked preferences, the utility each voter extracts from
a potential outcome declines monotonically in the distance between the voter
and the outcome. Downs argues that parties in a two-party system should thus
maximize support by staking out positions near that of the median voter. If
parties had no concern for maintaining unique identities, in fact, they would
become indistinguishable. In practice, parties have genuine ideological and
policy differences, and represent unique bases of party activists, and thus
never truly converge. But the American example does show two parties more
centrist in their orientations—at least historically—and more concerned with
“independent” voters than parties in multiparty systems (Burden, 2001).
   Applying the median voter theory to two-stage elections instead of singlecycle elections requires generalization beyond the simple theories of Black
and Downs. The most naïve model asserts that candidates face two stages of
median voter pressure: first, a candidate should seek the median primary
voter to secure a party’s nomination; if the candidate wins, he or she would
then need to converge toward the general electorate median voter. As primaries tend to be dominated by party activists, who in turn tend to be more
ideologically extreme (Brady, Han, & Pope, 2007), a full election cycle
should see the candidate transitioning away from the general electorate
median during the primary and then back toward the political center after
winning the primary.
   Cox (1990) defines these two conflicting sets of incentives as centrifugal
and centripetal forces. Centrifugal forces push candidates outward, away
from the political center. These include pressure from party activists and diehard partisans, who tend to be ideologically consistent and demand ideological purity from candidates. Centripetal forces pull candidates toward the
political center. This includes pressure from general election voters, who tend
to be more moderate in their policy preferences and less ideologically constrained, and thus less likely to support “extreme” candidates.
   This classic spatial model, though simple, provides ample intuition for
post-primary moderation. During primary campaigns, centrifugal forces predominate as candidates seek activist support, campaign donations, and primary votes. After all, a candidate who cannot secure his or her party
nomination will not earn the opportunity to pose a challenge in the general
election, no matter how widely popular or centrist he or she appears. After
winning a party nomination, though, centripetal forces kick in as candidates
seek to win over the median constituent. Put simply, candidates will attempt
to position themselves near the center of their current electorate.


Acree et al.                                                                   5

Disincentives for Moderation
Post-primary moderation, broadly defined, occurs when a candidate changes
his or her behavior to appeal more to centrist voters after securing a party
nomination. In media coverage of elections, we frequently hear the term “run
to the center,” which invokes an image of candidates, erstwhile out toward
the ideological poles during a primary election, rushing back to the middle
ground to appeal to typical American voters, or at least reduce the risk of
alienating them.
   Commentators typically discuss post-primary moderation in terms of candidates shifting their political stances on one or more policy issues. This
matches the canonical interpretation of the Hotelling, Black, and Downs
models, which imply that party, candidate, or firm “positioning” represents a
placement on a single issue, or on some scale of aggregated policy positions.
Burden (2001) employs this definition in his examination of post-primary
moderation, measuring aggregate policy positions in the primary and general
election periods using Congressional DW-Nominate scores. Nominate scores
rely upon roll call votes to measure legislators’ latent aggregate policy preferences, and Burden applies the procedure to votes taken during primary and
general election seasons. His analysis shows some modest evidence for postprimary moderation, though the change in legislator positions from the primary to the general election is small.
   This finding should not come as a surprise: moderation comes at a cost.
Burden (2004) spells out three reasons candidates may not moderate their policy positions after securing their parties’ nominations. First, candidates have
their own preferences and beliefs, and may not be willing to “sell out” to gain
an electoral advantage. Second, candidates may lose support if the public perceives them to be “waffling” or flip-flopping on the issues. And third, candidates have reputations that often prove difficult to change during a campaign.
   For a quintessential example of the risk inherent in strategic shifts of policy position during the course of two-stage elections, consider John Kerry’s
presidential run. As a Senator in 2002, Kerry had voted to support the Iraq
War. As a presidential candidate at the launch of the primary campaign in
January 2004, Kerry said, “I don’t believe the president took us to war as he
should have.” But then during the general campaign in August 2004, when
asked if he would still have gone to war knowing Saddam Hussein did not
possess weapons of mass destruction, he said, “Yes, I would have voted for
the authority. I believe it was the right authority for a president to have.”
Unlike rhetoric that merely hints at ideology, in this case, Kerry effectively
changed his policy position (and then changed it back again). And this changing of policy position did not go without notice or criticism. Video footage of


6                                               American Politics Research 00(0)

Kerry windsailing (which his campaign staffers had hoped would make him
seem young and healthy) was co-opted for use in a negative ad about Kerry’s
flip-flopping, with the tag line “whichever way the wind blows.” Bush further highlighted Kerry’s shifting positions during the second presidential
debate, on October 8, saying, “You know, for a while [Kerry] was a strong
supporter of getting rid of Saddam Hussein. He saw the wisdom—until the
Democrat primary came along and Howard Dean, the anti-war candidate,
began to gain on him, and he changed positions.” In short, Kerry’s change in
effective policy stance reflects some of the costs that policy moderation can
incur. The problem in Kerry’s statements, however, was not that they used
loose rhetoric to signal partisan ideology in the primary and then more moderate ideology in the general. Rather, Kerry’s statements cued a shift in actual
policy that was easy to identify and attack.
    Formal theories of two-stage elections have long sought to deal with these
costs explicitly (Agranov, 2011; Hummel, 2010). In a pair of compelling articles on the subject, Tomz and Van Houweling (2010, 2014) employ experimental designs to show that voters strongly prefer candidates who maintain
consistent platforms. Respondents exposed to a flip-flopping candidate were
less likely to trust the candidate’s new position; accordingly, even respondents
sympathetic to the candidate’s new stance tended to be less supportive of the
candidate after the change in position. As the authors conclude, “candidates
who emerge from primaries holding positions that diverge from the median
voter in the general electorate will rarely find it in their electoral interest to
shift to the center” (Tomz & Van Houweling, 2014, p. 16). Furthermore, they
write, candidates do not typically see electoral benefits from reversing position unless their “new” stance is favored by at least 70% of the electorate.
    These costs likely explain why Burden fails to find a strong moderation
effect, and more broadly why post-primary moderation has proven so difficult to detect. Candidates face strong incentives not to flip-flop on policy,
unless their new position is overwhelmingly popular. Furthermore, measuring convergence with roll call votes or similar data likely obfuscates moderation. Voters pay little attention to daily votes in Congress, and most roll call
votes recorded would convey little about the general ideological position of
candidates anyway. Policy moderation, then, gives candidates the worst of
both worlds: little potential upside at the risk of incurring a high cost. Thus,
it is unsurprising that we observe so little policy moderation. But what about
rhetorical moderation? Although candidates rarely change their policy positions between the primary and general campaigns, we expect they tend to
shift their ideological language in a manner that reduces cues aimed at more
extreme ideological audiences and increases cues of moderation or broad
appeal.


Acree et al.                                                                       7

Rhetorical Moderation
   He hasn’t changed his position on immigration. He’s changed the words that he
   is saying. (Trump Campaign Spokesperson Katrina Pierson on CNN, August
   25, 2016)

Ideology represents a constrained set of basic beliefs about politics (Converse,
1964). This characterization, most frequently invoked in studies of public
opinion, defines ideology in terms of abstract beliefs on fairness, justice, ethics, and morality which organize individuals’ political priorities and issue
preferences (Freeden, 2003; Lane, 1962). In other words, ideology entails not
just policy preferences but more importantly why citizens hold those preferences, and how they prioritize among them.
   Policy positions may not adequately tap the intricacies of ideological
thought. If ideology comprises the fundamental beliefs that organize political
preferences, we should incorporate expressions of ideological beliefs into our
measures. A candidate can take a position for any number of reasons, each of
which may derive from a different ideological interpretation of the policy.
Both liberals and libertarians tend to support less restrictive definitions of
marriage, for instance, but the former support it in the name of protecting
marginalized social groups while the latter are suspicious of government
restricting individual liberty.
   We therefore argue that candidates can “move toward the center” by
changing (a) the language they use in explaining their positions—framing
their policy preferences in terms less narrowly appealing to an ideological
base—and (b) the relative attention they pay to various policy areas, deemphasizing the most ideologically divisive issues. This leads to a notion of
attention-weighted ideology—ideology defined not just on one’s beliefs but
on the priority given or attention paid to particular values or issue areas—and
shapes how we define post-primary moderation theory. Recall that moderation serves to make a candidate more appealing to centrist voters and voters
likely to be alienated by ideologically extreme language. It does not matter if
a candidate actually is more centrist during the general election campaign, so
long as the voters perceive him or her to be so. Instead of “becoming” more
centrist by espousing a different set of policies, candidates can seek to make
themselves appear—or, better put, sound—more centrist by changing the
attention they pay to various issues, values, and beliefs, and by changing the
language they use in discussing these.
   Most citizens do not pay close attention to politics, and thus few boast
sophisticated knowledge of candidates’ policy positions. Hardcore partisans,
ideologues, and activists serve as the exception, and also happen to comprise


8                                              American Politics Research 00(0)

a large share of the primary electorate. For this reason, Burden (2001) anticipates that primary voters will demand firm policy commitments in-line with
majority party preferences. General election voters, who tend to be less ideological and less interested in politics, struggle to differentiate candidates
based on policy (Bawn et al., 2012). This gives candidates some freedom to
appear more moderate than their earlier policy positions might convey, as
general election voters will not generally notice any mismatch.
    Candidates can appear more moderate by employing more balanced rhetoric and avoiding the most divisive rhetorical cues, including language strongly
associated with particular movements deemed outside the mainstream by
most voters. Moderate voters, even if they cannot precisely identify candidates’ ideological positions, may still know that they do not like political
extremists. Candidates who frequently speak on fringe concerns (e.g., disbanding the Federal Reserve, banning genetically modified foods, allowing
intelligent design to be taught alongside evolution in public schools) will
appear outside of the mainstream. In a primary election, this may be advantageous, but in a general election, it is dangerous. Dangerous not simply because
many voters oppose a particular stance, but also because attention to fringe
ideas may be taken to imply risk of other—perhaps more distasteful—ones.
    Moderate, less partisan general election voters typically pay scant attention to party primaries, though, which creates an opportunity for strategic
candidates to reorient their focus and rhetorical cues when transitioning to the
general election period. For example, by focusing heavily on immigration
during a primary election—and doing so with heavy-handed language—a
Republican contender may align themselves with the priorities of base
Republican primary voters. Upon advancing to the general election, the candidate may find it advantageous to spend more time discussing bread-andbutter issues such as education, unemployment, and taxes, and either talking
less about immigration or employing less punitive rhetoric. Moreover, references that may serve as shibboleths for members of an activist base—for
example, “social justice” on the left or “natural law” on the right—may be
jarring to a more moderate or less zealous political audience. Such a shift
may serve the candidate’s strategic purposes in shoring up moderate
Republican support and appealing to some moderate Democrats without rendering them vulnerable to charges of flip-flopping.
    Candidates can also change how they explain their political vision to voters. Bawn et al. (2012) argue that even sizable policy differences can appear
negligible to many voters. A candidate can capitalize on this informational
asymmetry: by employing strategic messaging, the candidate may be able to
make his or her policy positions appear more centrist (Iyengar & Simon,
2000). In a Democratic primary, for example, a candidate may justify their


Acree et al.                                                                  9

tax plan by appealing to social justice and aid to low-income workers, but this
same candidate may switch the framing of their plan in the general election,
preferring to speak about funding programs that support the middle class.
   To summarize, a candidate’s policy positions alone may not sufficiently
reveal whether the candidate tailors his or her ideological messaging to the
current electorate. Candidates might maintain fairly stable official policy
stances across the two-stage election, but tailor how they explain, or how
much they emphasize, their positions depending on the audience. This possibility opens up exciting research avenues, for it demands a more refined
way of measuring ideological moderation than tallying explicit changes in
policy positions. After all, candidates in political contests are engaging in a
signaling game, attempting to claim common cause with members of the
electorate. Examining political rhetoric can provide the necessary information about the signals candidates send, shedding light on the language they
use to they express their ideological beliefs.


Expectations
In a primary campaign, candidates should use more clearly oriented ideological language—that is, a high proportion of rhetoric that we associate uniquely
with liberals or conservatives (or more radical voices of the left or right) and
with particular segments of their respective base (e.g., religious right, libertarians, and cultural populists for Republicans, and progressives, socialists,
and various identity-oriented social movements2 for Democrats). After winning a primary, though, the candidate should seek more balance in their rhetoric. Instead of trying to sound highly partisan, the candidate should use more
diverse language, speaking to issues of importance to liberals and conservatives, and discussing his or her world view using language that will appeal to
a broad swath of the public.
    Our rhetorical moderation hypothesis could theoretically hold in any twostage election where a party nomination contest is followed by a general election. In many contexts, however, the electorates may not be distinct enough
to create a true moderation incentive. As Brady et al. (2007) argue, many
Congressional races involve primary and general election constituencies that
overlap considerably, to the point where candidates face little incentive to
make significant changes after securing the nomination. Furthermore, we
should only expect transformations when both the primary and general elections are contested, and thus likely to attract broad voter attention (Agranov,
2011; Meirowitz, 2005). In low-salience or uncontested elections, the potential upsides of the moderation strategy would almost certainly be washed out
by the risk of appearing disingenuous (Hummel, 2010).


10                                              American Politics Research 00(0)

    Finally, we would only expect rhetorical moderation in cases where public
attitudes toward candidates are fluid. As Burden (2001) argues, post-primary
moderation only works if voters are persuadable with respect to the candidate’s ideological position. A candidate with an established reputation as a
strong liberal will have little reason to appear more moderate. In fact, that
candidate may appear disingenuous in the eyes of a public that already
believes him to be liberal (Burden, 2001).
    For these reasons, we focus our energies on presidential candidates, and
the 2008 and 2012 elections in particular (these being the two most recent
presidential elections at the time of our data collection). In presidential elections, the stakes of party nominations are extremely high, attracting quality
candidates and the investment of party activists and donors, who are likely to
demand that nominees represent the preferences of party loyalists. Presidential
campaigns also entail two distinct electorates: party primary voters and a
more centrist general electorate. And presidential campaigns also vary in how
established public attitudes toward candidates are. Early in 2008, for example, many voters had no opinion of either Barack Obama or John McCain. By
2012, however, most citizens had an established opinion about incumbent
President Obama, even if they lacked a fixed opinion about Mitt Romney. We
therefore expect to see strong rhetorical moderation from Barack Obama and
John McCain in 2008, and Mitt Romney in 2012, but little or no moderation
from Obama in 2012.


Design
Our theory demands a research design that can shed light on how presidential
candidates communicate their ideological positions, and how their communication may change after winning a primary nomination contest. This naturally requires some form of text analysis. For many decades, scholars coded
textual data with labor-intensive human coding. Yet, as King and Lowe
(2003) point out, human coding places inordinate demands on researcher
resources and may not produce reliable data. Given these revelations, and the
burgeoning capacity to deal with large data sets, we employ an automated
approach to studying presidential rhetoric.
    Measuring ideology in language is not straightforward. We contend that
ideological beliefs—or strategic representations thereof—will manifest
through the written or spoken word. More specifically, we assume that political language contains ideological signals. These signals can take many forms:
explicit policy positions, attention paid to particular issues, or even simple
word choice. For example, conservative politicians may, on average, speak
more on immigration than on Medicaid, and may be more likely to use phrases


Acree et al.                                                                   11

such as “border security” or “illegal alien” than liberals, who may instead refer
to “comprehensive immigration reform” and “undocumented immigrants.”
    Roderick Hart (2000), in a book on the word choice of presidential candidates, argues that campaigns serve to “teach” about politics, “preach” as a
kind of performative ritual, “sensitize” us to political content at regular intervals, and “activate” the masses by increasing their sense of political efficacy
to mobilize them to vote. He notes a drop in direct party-based references in
the language of candidates since the 1950s, but warns of a potential for
“stealth politics” in its place. He focuses primarily on style over ideology,
noting that George McGovern—recalled by many as too radical to have a
chance at beating Nixon in 1972—in fact presented a “midwestern, ministerial style [that] consistently overrode his philosophical biases” during the
general election period. Nonetheless, Hart concedes that “the general campaign is not the primary, and more than one author has documented
McGovern’s slide to the middle after he secured the Democratic nomination”
(chapter 4, endnote 57). Such documentation, however, remains impressionistic, as in the one citation provided by Hart (2000), Bob Greene’s (1973)
Running: A Nixon-McGovern Campaign Journal.
    We treat ideological language quite generally. We seek to measure the
ideological content of political language by tracking the signals that political
candidates convey through their speech. To identify those signals, we employ
a supervised approach—specifically, we seek to learn ideological signals
from a corpus of political writings by (mostly) recognized authors of known
ideological leanings. Then we use this information to observe whether, on
average, the ideological signals employed by candidates change between the
primary and general election.
    Our research design unfolds as follows: using a large corpus of political
texts, we identify the key phrases associated with particular ideological subcorpora. Then, using this vocabulary, we examine the campaign speeches of
all major party presidential candidates in 2008 and 2012, paying particular
attention to the three candidates who competed both in presidential primaries
and in a general election: Barack Obama (2008), John McCain (2008), and
Mitt Romney (2012). If the post-primary moderation theory bears out in the
data, we would expect these three candidates to transition toward the ideological center after securing their parties’ nominations.

Identifying Ideological Cues
To identify the key phrases that help us to infer a speaker’s ideology, we construct a corpus of 170 books and magazines from authors of familiar ideological bents. We restrict our attention to books and issues of magazines


12                                              American Politics Research 00(0)

published that have nearly all been published over a narrow time-frame, to
minimize temporal variation in political rhetoric as much as possible.
Following the method described by Sim, Acree, Gross, and Smith (2013), we
assign each text an ideological class from the set {Left, Center, Right} based
on our understanding of the author’s ideological beliefs, according to their
reputations and self-identification. We further assign to each text an ideological subclass, again based on our judgment of the authors’ predominant ideological beliefs. Liberals and others on the Left are assigned a subclass from
the set {Socialist, Progressive, Center-Left, Religious Left}. Conservatives
and others on the Right are assigned a subclass from the set {Populist Right,
Religious Right, Far Right, Libertarian, Center-Right}. As outlined in Sim
et al. (2013), we have informally validated the class labels with a panel of
experts—five graduate students specializing in contemporary American politics—who confirmed that the phrases extracted from the model matched their
intuition about the ideologies of the authors.3
    Unlike many existing approaches to extracting ideological meaning from
text (see Diermeier, Godbout, Yu, & Kaufmann, 2012; Laver, Benoit, & Garry,
2003; Lowe, Benoit, Mikhaylov, & Laver, 2011; Monroe, Colaresi, & Quinn,
2008; Monroe & Schrodt, 2008; Slapin & Proksch, 2008, inter alia), we do not
explicitly seek to scale ideologues into a Euclidean space. Instead, we approach
ideology as a discrete construct. This better matches our theoretical understanding of ideology as a hierarchical set of clustered ideas (Freeden, 2003). To
maintain as much nuance as possible in the political texts, we avoid collapsing
the unique ideas of libertarianism and religious conservatism, for example, into
a single conservative class. Rather, we seek to capture the meaningful nuance
of multiple ideological classes within broad left and right divisions.
    To facilitate analysis of our textual data, we remove common words (stop
words), such as “and,” “the,” and “or.” We also stem words, meaning we
combine words based on word stems so that words like “debate,” “debated,”
and “debating” all register as versions of the same word, instead of counting
as unique words. Finally, we combine individual words into bi-, tri-, and fourgram word phrases, or tokens. A token is simply a unique word or multi-word
phrase that serves as our unit of analysis.4
    Each document in the corpus is thus represented at this stage as a bag of
multi-word phrases. Recall that each document also has a hand-labeled ideological class and subclass designation. To identify tokens that distinguish
classes and subclasses from one another—for example, to identify language
that occurs frequently in documents written by libertarian but not religious liberal authors—we fit a sparse additive generative model (SAGE) (Eisenstein,
Ahmed, & Xing, 2011). With known document labels, this amounts to a hierarchical multinomial logistic regression with sparsity-inducing Laplace priors on


Acree et al.                                                                         13

the ideological class and subclass effects.5 In essence, we are estimating the
added logodds of term appearance associated with particular ideologies,
subideologies, topics, and authors.
    Let W be a set of terms—in this context, bi-, tri-, and four-grams—that may
possibly overlap multiple ideological classes. Furthermore, let ε k be the additive
effect for ideology k and let e0 be the background effect. Then, for each term
 wi ∈ W and each effect e0 and ek ∈ ε , we generate θe, w from a zero-centered
Laplace distribution, with hyperparameter λ e−1 which varies over the effects.
    Now, let D be the set of documents (books and magazines), and assume
that each document d ∈ D contains a bag of terms. We have observed the
effects for each document, each given by ε d ⊆ ε . For each term t in each
document, the model generates wd ,t from a multinomial distribution with
probabilities given as follows:
                                         exp     θe , w∑
                                                       e∈εd
                             p ( w | θ) =                                  .         (1)
                                              ∑ exp ∑θ
                                             w′∈         e∈εd
                                                                     e,w


   This is the probability of observing a given term conditioned on the additive effect for the term associated with an ideological category. For more, see
page 2 of Eisenstein et al.’s (2011) paper.
   To estimate the model parameters, we must first estimate the background
effect. Fortunately, this is fairly straightforward; the background effect is fit
using logged relative frequency of each term w in each document d ∈ D :
                                                   freq ( w;  )
                                θe , w = log                         ,               (2)
                                    0                  ||
and the remaining ideological effects are estimated by solving the unconstrained convex problem via the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm:
                             |d |
                  max
                    θ
                        ∑∑ log p(w | θ) + ∑λ ∑ | θ | .
                        d∈D t =1
                                            d ,t
                                                         e∈ε
                                                                 e
                                                                     w∈W
                                                                               e,w   (3)

   The maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates of the parameters give the
added log-odds that each term appears in an ideological category. SAGE estimates, then, tell us how much more or less likely an author from a particular
ideological class (and subclass) will use any of the words in our vocabulary.

Testing the Rhetorical Moderation Hypothesis
To examine whether presidential candidates exhibit rhetorical moderation following their party primaries, we analyze transcripts of presidential campaign


14                                                     American Politics Research 00(0)

Table 1. Number of Speeches Available for Each Candidate, and the Average
Number of Terms per Speech per Candidate.

                                             Years of         Number of Average Terms
Candidate                   Party            Speeches          Speeches  per Speech
Michele Bachmann         Republican         2011-2012               6             2,259
Joe Biden                Democrat           2007-2008               6             2,543
Herman Cain              Republican           2011                  2             2,992
Hillary Clinton          Democrat           2007-2008             105             3,759
John Edwards             Democrat           2007-2008              27             3,072
Newt Gingrich            Republican         2011-2012              15             3,163
Rudy Giuliani            Republican         2007-2008              36             1,863
Mike Huckabee            Republican         2007-2008              14             2,556
Jon Huntsman             Republican         2011-2012               5             1,899
John McCain*             Republican         2006-2008             169             2,542
Barack Obama*            Democrat           2008-2012             258             3,450
Ron Paul                 Republican           2012                  7             2,439
Rick Perry               Republican         2011-2012              10             1,772
Mitt Romney*             Republican         2006-2012              59             2,551
Bill Richardson          Democrat           2007-2008              29             3,050
Rick Santorum            Republican         2011-2012              16             2,457
Fred Thompson            Republican         2007-2008              15             2,683

Note. Asterisks designate the candidates observed in both the primary and general election.


speeches from the 2008 and 2012 presidential primary and general elections.
We focus on these two election cycles for practical reasons of data limitations.
Digital copies of political texts did not become widely available until the midaughts. The earliest book in our Contemporary American Ideological Books
(CAIB) Corpus6 was published in 2007, and the newest was published in
2014. Because ideological signals might change over time, we limit ourselves
to this time frame, namely, the 2008 and 2012 elections.
    Collecting transcripts from the University of California Santa Barbara’s
American Presidency Project yields 779 speech transcripts from 17 candidates
(five Democrats and 12 Republicans). Table 1 breaks down the number of
speeches per candidate, and the average number of terms per speech. For the
three candidates who advanced to the general election, we also denote each
speech’s “epoch,” defined as whether the candidate delivered the speech during the primary election (before securing enough delegates to win his party’s
nomination) or the general election (after winning his party nomination).
    Having built a “dictionary” of ideological phrases in the first stage of analysis, we proceed to examine the candidates’ use of ideological language during


Acree et al.                                                                     15

the presidential campaign. Following the innovative method introduced in Sim
et al. (2013), we drop the bag-of-terms assumption and model each campaign
speech as a nonexchangable sequence of cue phrases interdigitated by filler
words. Similar to a hidden Markov model (HMM), the Cue-Lag for Ideological
Proportions (CLIP) model allows inference of the ideology of a speaker based
on the phrases the speaker uses and the order in which the speaker employs
those phrases. The CLIP model additionally tracks the length of “lag
periods”—the number of filler words an author uses between uttering ideologically important cue phrases—to illuminate how long the author has spent
speaking from various ideological perspectives.
    To see how the model works, consider starting at the beginning of a speech
where we assume the originating ideological state can be treated as some
generic background political state. Moving forward in time, we encounter the
first ideologically separating term. To infer the ideological class and subclass
from which that word was “emitted,” we refer to the ideology-specific multinomial distributions over the terms in the vocabulary. We use the SAGE estimates from the first stage to specify priors on the the class- and subclass-specific
term distributions.7 As we move forward through the speech, we encounter
perhaps more uninformative terms before coming to the second ideologically
separating term.
    At this point, we have two pieces of important information: the term distributions for the ideological classes and subclasses, and the inferred class
and subclass from the previous term. The former is again informed by the
SAGE weights. For the latter, the HMM allows us to model the speaker’s
transition from (sub)class to (sub)class. The tree structure (see Figure 1)
counts the edges between subclasses, and a priori favors shorter transitions.
For instance, if the model classifies w1 as being emitted from the “religious
left” subclass, the model places somewhat higher probability that cue term
 w2 will be emitted from another left subclass rather than from a center or
right subclass. This is effectively a substantive prior on the ideological structure of American politics: it smooths the potential switches between ideological classes and subclasses, but does not absolutely prevent the model from
inferring switches when the text warrants it.
    Our primary inferential task is to ascertain how long an ideologue spends
in each ideological state. To do so, we tally the lag periods between ideologically interesting cue terms—that is, we count the filler terms between cues.
We attribute half to the model’s previous inferred ideological state, and half
to the models currently inferred ideological state.8
    The high-level generative story for a single speech with T cue-lag pairs
follows the generative story of a HMM with Bayesian priors for the
parameters:


16                                                American Politics Research 00(0)


Figure 1. Ideology tree structure.


     1.   Parameters are drawn from conjugate priors.
     2.   Let the initial state be the Background state.
     3.   For t ∈{1, 2, , T } :9
          a. Transition to state St based on the transition distribution. This
               transition is conditioned on the previous state St −1 and the lag at
               timestep t −1 , denoted by Lt −1 .
          b. Emit cue term Wt from the lexicon associated with state St , and
               emit the lag Lt .

    What differentiates this model from a conventional HMM is that the transition parameters are defined in terms of the ideology tree (Figure 1), and the
emission parameters are defined in terms of the lexicons and the lags, as
discussed above.
    A more complete technical model exposition can be found in the online
appendix, or in Sim et al. (2013). Model parameters are estimated by Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) with EM steps, and with Gibbs sampling during
the E-steps to sample the remaining latent variables xd ,i and rd ,i , and direct
optimization during M-step for ζ . λ can be set to the maximum likelihood
estimate as it is essentially observed and independent.
    This model provides certain advantages over other available methods.10 First,
we do not need to classify candidate speeches as deriving from a single ideological perspective. We recognize that candidates will necessarily adopt ideas from
several ideological groups into their campaign appeals. The CLIP model allows
for this by inferring ideological perspective on a token-by-token basis. Each time
a candidate selects an ideological phrase (i.e., chooses to emit a cue), they have
the option to transition from their current ideological perspective to a new one.


Acree et al.                                                                   17

Second, the model leverages our hierarchical conception of ideology and the
order in which phrases appear in a speech. Unlike bag-of-words methods, in
which word order does not matter, the CLIP model reflects the simple truth that
speakers are unlikely to skip around from ideological perspectives with abandon.
Instead, the model uses the similarity between ideological classes and subclasses
when estimating the perspective from which a speaker is emitting phrases. For
example, if a candidate is sounding like left-leaning authors and then uses vocabulary associated with both Religious Left and Religious Right, these new terms
will more likely be estimated as generated from the former than the latter.


Putting Together the Design Elements
To summarize, our research design involves two stages. In the first stage, we
employ a large corpus of political texts to build a dictionary of ideological
phrases. For each multiword phrase in this training corpus, we estimate an
ideological and subideological “effect,” which we use to infer how likely
ideologues of a certain class–subclass profile are to employ each phrase a
priori. After thus defining the dictionary, we proceed to the analysis of campaign speeches from the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections using only the
selected terms. Using the CLIP model, we estimate the share of time each
candidate spends emitting phrases from each ideological class and subclass.
During inference, the probability that each token comes from each ideological class and subclass is estimated, given the context of other tokens, and also
taking into account as a prior the associations uncovered by SAGE.
   The post-primary moderation theory leads us to predict that McCain and
Romney should employ rhetoric consistent with the more right-wing ideologies during the Republican primaries, before moving toward the center in the
general election; conversely, Obama should employ more liberal language in
the Democratic primary and more balanced rhetoric in the general election in
2008. During 2012, we would also anticipate that Obama should largely
abandon a balanced rhetoric, as his 4 years in office had largely cemented the
view of Obama as a liberal.


Results
To assess the veracity of the rhetorical moderation hypothesis, we examine
the estimated proportion of “time” each candidate spends speaking from liberal and conservative perspectives. Even though the CLIP model does not
scale candidates into a Euclidean space, we can represent the degree of ideological “balance” by the proportion of time candidates spend using left- and
right-leaning ideological language. If a candidate used roughly equal parts


18                                                       American Politics Research 00(0)


Figure 2. Proportion of “time” spent using phrases from the liberal (y axis) and
conservative (x axis) ideological vocabularies.
Note. Hollow figures indicate the primary speeches and solid figures indicate general elections;
squares represent Republican candidates and triangles represent Democrats. The intersection
of the main diagonal lines marks a 50-50 balance between time spent sampling from the left
and right ideological vocabularies. Because the “centrist” category is omitted from the figure,
proportions may not sum to unity.


liberal and conservative language, we could think of the candidate as sounding moderate in their ideological expression.11 Put another way, the balanced
use of “liberal” and “conservative” language does not necessarily mean a
candidate is appealing to each side at equal rates; rather a lack of clear signaling is likely to confound model estimation in a manner analogous to how it
confounds voters attempting to pigeonhole the candidate. Table 2 provides
the estimated proportional speech time spent drawing on phrases from each
basic ideological orientation and subideological class.
   Figure 2 shows aggregate left-right proportions of all candidates from the
2008 and 2012 presidential elections. To compute these estimates, we simply
add up the proportion of time each candidate spends speaking from any of the
liberal versus any conservative vocabularies, as detailed in Table 3. Accordingly,
a candidate at the intersection of the two diagonals would represent campaign
rhetoric perfectly balanced between left and right. Candidates in the lower right
quadrant represent a high proportion of conservative rhetoric and low levels of
liberal rhetoric, while the top-left quadrant represents the inverse.
   As the figure shows, our basic intuition about American party identities is
borne out in the data. Republican candidates tend to occupy the conservative
section of the figure, while the Democratic candidates tend to occupy the


Acree et al.                                                                                19


Figure 3. Evidence for the rhetorical moderation hypothesis from three
presidential candidates in two election cycles: (a) Barack Obama in 2008, (b) John
McCain in 2008, and (c) Mitt Romney in 2012.
Note. Shaded regions represent high posterior density regions, smoothed using a bivariate
normal kernel density smoother. Crosshairs (“+”) mark the posterior medians for each
marked electoral stage. The intersection of the main diagonal lines marks a 50-50 balance
between time spent sampling from the left and right ideological vocabularies. Because the
centrist category is omitted from the figure, proportions may not sum to unity.


liberal section. Candidates who occupy positions further from the center also
tend to match our intuition: the model estimates Michele Bachmann, Herman
Cain, Ron Paul, Mike Huckabee, Rick Santorum, and Rick Perry to use higher
proportions of conservative language, while moderates Jon Huntsman and
Tim Pawlenty are located nearer the center. We also draw reader attention to
evidence supporting one of our hypotheses: setting aside whether he moderated in 2008, we see that President Obama’s 2012 general election rhetoric
was quite liberal. In fact, his rhetoric nearly matched the ideological balance
of his primary election rhetoric from 4 years earlier. This matches our expectations based on Burden (2001): because Obama was well-established in the
public mind by 2012, he had little to gain from attempting to appear more
centrist.
   Figure 2 also offers evidence supporting the rhetorical moderation hypothesis, although the abundance of other candidates makes it difficult to decipher. Referring instead to Figure 3, we can see how Obama, McCain, and
Romney all employed more balanced rhetoric in the general election. To indicate measurement uncertainty, we include the highest Bayesian posterior
density regions around these point estimates. Darker areas of the plot signify
higher posterior probabilities, which we can interpret as the most likely ideological mixture proportion12 of the candidate at each election stage. In each
case, we see little to no overlap in the primary and general election posterior


20                                              American Politics Research 00(0)

distributions, providing strong evidence that the candidates shifted their rhetoric in the expected direction. In fact, the posterior probability of the expected
shifts (e.g., Obama sounding more liberal during the Democratic primary and
more conservative during the general election) are at least 0.99 for each candidate, indicating negligible chances of observing these patterns by chance
alone.13
   Given the aggregate evidence supporting the rhetorical moderation theory,
we turn now to more refined measures of ideological language. Here, the
noisy nature of text returns slightly more complicated results. As Table 2
shows, we estimate that candidates spend relatively little time speaking from
the more refined ideological perspectives. We believe this to most likely
occur for both substantive and methodological reasons. Substantively, we
believe that candidates must appeal not only to their unique ideological sympathizers but to the party base as a whole. As a result, the candidates’ language will borrow some phrases from specialized subideologies, but generally
will represent a broader class of ideological language. And on the methodological side, the ideological subclasses both overlap in their vocabularies
and contain less information than we can learn from the aggregate top-level
class labels. It thus becomes easier to classify phrases as deriving from the
broader ideological class than from the more refined subclasses, yielding
much higher proportions for the top-level “left” and “right” proportions than
for the refined subclasses.
   Tables 4 and 5 contain the top distinguishing phrases of left and right ideologies, respectively, based on documents from the book and magazine corpus, as learned in the first stage of the CLIP model estimation process. Table
6 does the same for texts designated as centrist. Some of these terms are
obviously meaningful, as for example in the populist right’s fixation on
immigration, trade, race, and culture–with certain phrases such as “illegal
aliens” and “open border” distinctive to their particular perspective. The
same can be said for the religious right, with “Christian nation,” “anti-Christian,” “pro-life,” and “San Francisco”–a modern version of Sodom and
Gomorrah in such writings–among top cues. Others serve as shibboleths
likely unfamiliar to outsiders. References to “raw milk” by libertarians
abound, as laws requiring pasteurization serve as symbols of government
regulations run amok in a supposed nanny-state. “Property rights,” “economic freedom,” and mentions of various constitutional rights and protections have more obvious connections to libertarian ideology.
   Centrist (often bipartisan) vocabulary includes many technocratic concerns, references to visions of middle America–”average American,”
“American dream,” “country music”–and the word “Centrist” itself, as well as
names of right-wing talk radio hosts, ostensibly as examples of


     Table 2. Estimated Percentage of Time Each Candidate Spent Speaking From Each Ideological Perspective.

                                             Center-                     Religious-             Far                    Center-                 ReligiousLeft   Socialist    Left       Progressive       Left     Right      Right    Libertarian     Right Populist           Right
     Obama P08            16           6        19             5           12             4       5           5             9         12         5
     Obama G08            15           7         9             8            3             6       1          19            12          6         9
     Obama G12            50           0         1             5            0            38       0           1             0          0         4
     Romney P08           25           1         0             2           20            10       1           6            17          4        13
     Romney 08-11         28           2         5            12            0            28      14           7             3          0         0
     Romney P12           28           0         1             1            2            34       8          14             0          1         2
     Romney G12           29          13         2             1            4            29      11           5             1          2         0
     McCain P08            8           4         2             2            4            18       2           4            39          6         1
     McCain G08           20           4         2             4            1            21       2           4            12          5         2
     Bachmann             14           2         2             3            3            38       8          12             4          2         5
     Biden                56           3         2             8            3            19       2           1             1          1         1
     Cain                 11           1         4             2            4            33       5           2             5          2         8
     Clinton              48           1         1            15            2            13       0           2             2          1         1
     Edwards              40           2        14            11            1            21       1           1             3          1         2
     Giuliani             20           2         4             3            3            31       5           5             6          9         3
     Huckabee             23           0         2             1            2            33       3           7             6          4        12
     Huntsman             33           1         2             1           10            31       4           2             5          2         2
     Paul                 21           1         2             2            1            41       3           7             3          1         7
     Pawlenty             33           5         4             3            8            16       3           6             7          1         7
     Perry                21           2         2             3            2            33       5           7             9          2         4
     Richardson           29          10         1            13            5            21       1           1             3          6         4
     Santorum             25           1         1             2            1            36       3           4             5          2         3

     Note. Point estimates are given as posterior means. “Left” and “Right” refer to the top-level ideological classes, and other designations represent
     ideological subclasses. Rounding may result in estimates not summing to unity.


22                                                     American Politics Research 00(0)

Table 3. Estimated Percentage of Time Each Candidate Spent Speaking From the
Summed Left and Right Perspectives, and From Centrist Perspective.
                                    ∑          left          ∑     right           Centrist
Obama (Primary 2008)                         59                  41                    0
Obama (General 2008)                         42                  53                    5
Obama (General 2012)                         56                  43                    1
Romney (Primary 2008)                        49                  51                    0
Romney (2008-2011)                           46                  52                    2
Romney (Primary 2012)                        33                  59                    8
Romney (General 2012)                        48                  49                    3
McCain (Primary 2008)                        20                  70                   10
McCain (General 2008)                        31                  47                   22
Bachmann                                     24                  69                    7
Biden                                        73                  24                    3
Cain                                         22                  56                   22
Clinton                                      68                  19                   13
Edwards                                      68                  28                    4
Giuliani                                     31                  58                   10
Huckabee                                     29                  65                    6
Huntsman                                     46                  46                    7
Paul                                         26                  63                   11
Pawlenty                                     53                  39                    7
Perry                                        30                  60                   10
Richardson                                   58                  37                    5
Santorum                                     30                  54                   16

Note. Point estimates are given as posterior means. Rounding may result in estimates not
summing to unity.


people contributing to polarization. Similar distinctions can be identified by
examination of the distinguishing phrases on the left. Terms such as “monopoly capitalism,” “class struggle,” “ruling class,” and “corporate state” seem to
be distinctively socialist. Other top terms of the socialist left, such as “social
justice,” are also associated with other left-leaning writers, especially progressives, but do not appear in the top handful of their terms shown in Table 4.
   To facilitate examination of this research by other scholars, we have provided full results from the model online via an interactive module.14 An interesting feature of the module is that it allows for easy perusal of the actual
ideological tokens used by each candidate and the modal posterior ideological classification estimated by the model. These results shed some light on
how exactly the candidates altered their ideological language as they transitioned from the primary to the general election.


Acree et al.                                                                                     23

Table 4. Phrases That Most Clearly Distinguish Each Ideological Subclass From
the Others, Based on the Class- and Subclass-Effects Estimated Using the FirstStage SAGE Model.

Left Ideologies

Progressive L                 Socialist L               Center L                 Religious L
United States      United States      United States                        biological family
American Prospect monopoly capitalism modern art                           progressive religion
Abu Ghraib         class struggle     young woman                          nuclear family
executive director occupy movement eighteenth century                      bad theology
public info        political economy  al Jazeera                           religious issue
State Department capitalist system    Mitt Romney                          early church
public policy      trade union        twentieth century                    religious community
Vice President     labor movement     great deal                           American creed
interest rate      ruling class       free market                          Willow Creek
Head Start         developing country tax code                             strict father
United Nations     public option      free trade                           early Christians
mental illness     working people     common law                           Mother Theresa
John Kerry         Dr. King           supply siders                        family values
San Francisco      American worker    South Africa                         God’s love
Iraq war           economic crisis    living conditions                    tax collector
child care         social justice     K Street                             NUM_Matthew
civil war          working class      interest rate                        NUM_Mark
political power    fossil fuel        Grover Norquist                      NUM_Luke
community college corporate state     private sector                       NUM_John

Note. Many of the terms match the expectations of area experts, with the exception the
rather anemic centrist category. The difficulty in extracting meaningful “centrist” words
largely stems, we believe, from the relatively few truly centrist authors of political tracts.
SAGE = sparse additive generative model.


    Take, for example, Barack Obama’s usage of the phrase “middle class.”
During the 2008 Democratic primary, Obama referred to the middle class
relatively infrequently—only 18 times—compared to frequent use (134
times) in the general election. In the primary, Obama also focused much more
attention on universal health care (41 mentions in primary speeches vs. four
in the general election), the death penalty (11 vs. 0), and mandated fuel efficiency standards (11 vs. 3), while increasing attention on capital gains taxes
on small businesses (1 time in the primary vs. 121 times in the general), small
businesses more generally (8 vs. 114), tax credits (26 vs. 76), and tax relief
more generally (0 vs. 48).
    Romney altered his rhetorical attention similarly, sharply cutting his references to “economic freedom” (25 times in the primary vs. 8 in the general


24                                                    American Politics Research 00(0)

Table 5. Phrases That Most Clearly Distinguish Each Ideological Subclass From
the Others, Based on the Class- and Subclass-Effects Estimated Using the FirstStage SAGE Model.

Right ideologies

Center R            Populist R         Religious R           Far R         Libertarian R
Governor       illegal aliens       Christian nation illegal immig.      raw milk
  Bush
Ronald Reagan illegal               human beings       North Korea       property rights
                  immigrants
human being border patrol           Jesus Christ     flat tax          chief justice
foreign policy immig. reform        anti-Christian   political correct natural right
Middle East    birthrate            New York         big gov’t         founding fathers
John McCain national media          God’s word       affirmative       eminent domain
                                                       action
radio program civil war             Sarah Palin      Jewish state      Supreme Court
Saddam        Los Angeles           fed. gov’t       human life        constitutional
  Hussein                                                                right
Repub. Party white America          San Francisco Saudi Arabia         TSA agent
mass          African               private property Arab Spring       Ninth Circuit
  destruction   American
Karl Rove     open border           elementary         radio show        bear arms
                                      school
Cold War         trade deficit      Holy Spirit   American        free speech
                                                    exception
Sam’s Club      elected officials year old        left wing       Habeas Corpus
look back       corporate         pro life        mainstream      Fourth
                  America                           media           Amendment
Social Security free trade        Joseph Smith    popular culture Fourteenth
                                                                    Amendment
Miss America culture war          public schools global warming judicial activism
Iraq war        special interest Planned          hard work       economic
                                    Parenthood                      freedom
mind-set        national interest Judeo-Christian Muslim          Federal Reserve
                                                    Brotherhood
class voter     working men       daily saint     Ron Paul        medical
                                                                    marijuana
health care     border security Jim Wallis        foreign aid     defense attorney

Note. Many of the terms match the expectations of area experts, with some confusion
between Far Right and Populist Right classes. SAGE = sparse additive generative model.

election), accusing Democrats of wanting to raise taxes (13 vs. 4), and completely dropping self-references as a conservative (7 vs. 0). Meanwhile,


Acree et al.                                                                                     25

Table 6. Phrases That Most Clearly Distinguish Centrists From Subideologies of
Left or Right, Based on the Class- and Subclass-Effects Estimated Using the FirstStage SAGE Model.

Centrist ideology
Centrist
  Long Beach
  debt limit
  stock option
  country music
  average American
  corporate America
  original intent
  tax increase
  Mark Levin
  American dream
  Wal Mart
  super PAC
  George Washington
  loan office
  Republican Party
  Glenn Beck
  Washington, DC
  Alexander Hamilton
  debt ceiling

Note. Many of the terms match the expectations of area experts, with the exception the
rather anemic centrist category. The difficulty in extracting meaningful “centrist” words
largely stems, we believe, from the relatively few truly centrist authors of political tracts.
SAGE = sparse additive generative model.


Romney increased his references to the middle class (8 to 23 times), the
African American community (0 to 9 times) and education reform (0 to 14
times) after winning the Republican nomination. And McCain, for his part, cut
his references to the Bush tax cuts in half despite the fact that McCain used a
far greater number of ideological phrases in the general than in the primary.
   In examining these examples from the source material, we do not find
candidates changing or adopting new policy positions. Rather, the candidates
merely use their language to draw attention to different issues, or to explain
those positions in a different manner. Of course not all changes are quite so
stark, which speaks to why our methodology serves us well in this exercise.
By leveraging a supervised but automated approach to analyzing political
rhetoric, we balance the need for substantive area expertise with the ability


26                                              American Politics Research 00(0)

for statistical models to detect subtle but prevalent patterns of rhetorical
change. Our results show that candidates strategically craft their rhetoric to
their electorate, and most importantly, that candidates systematically engage
in post-primary ideological moderation.


Discussion
In this article, we have presented a theory of rhetorical moderation. Journalistic
accounts of presidential campaigns suggest that strong partisans drag electoral
candidates toward the ideological extremes during primary contests. Candidates
who secure their party nominations must then shift back toward the median
general electorate voter or else risk voters perceiving them as extremists. This
tendency to move toward the center features prominently in campaign narratives, especially of presidential elections, though the phenomenon has seen
almost no empirical support.
    To test the idea that candidates are indeed using rhetoric to make it appear
as though they are more partisan during the primary but more moderate during the general, we employ a novel approach to computational text analysis
of campaign speeches. Using a two-stage model for classifying the ideological composition of political rhetoric, we show that all three major party
nominees from the 2008 and 2012 election cycles underwent similar ideological transformations after winning their party primaries. In both quantifiable and substantively meaningful ways, Obama, McCain, and Romney all
spoke as more ideologically extreme candidates during the primary season,
before changing their language to sound more ideologically balanced in the
general election.
    We find the evidence we have presented compelling, and encourage the
reader to consider three points. First, the moderating pattern occurs in two
election cycles and with three candidates, and in all three cases, the rhetorical
moderation was pronounced, and in the predicted direction. This is unlikely
to occur by chance (a conservative estimate would be a one-in-eight [12.5%]
chance, the same as getting all heads when flipping a fair coin 3 times).
Second, the methods we employ to measure moderation are clearly picking
up on an ideological component to political language, as evidenced by the top
terms associated with ideological classes and the reasonable liberal-conservative positioning of the 17 candidates under consideration. Third, the pattern
we find is robust to model specification.
    Can we go further in assessing the nature of the linguistic shifts observed?
Namely, do they seem purely rhetorical, or do they reflect actual changes in
policy position? To investigate this question, we considered the speeches by
the three general election candidates in 2008 and 2012 on five policy areas:


Acree et al.                                                                 27

health care, immigration, taxes, abortion, and environmental policy. We
chose these as a hard test for the hypothesis that, although their rhetoric is
shifting, their policy positions are not. On each of these issues, the two party
bases hold more extreme preferences than the general public. These areas are
thus ripe for policy flip-flopping should it occur. Thus, while absence of evidence is not evidence of absence, we look closely where the most pronounced
evidence of policy shift should occur if it exists.
   Our first observation is simple: we find no evidence for policy shifts
between the primary and general elections. In fact, the speeches in our sample contain rather few outright policy statements in general. When such statements were made, they were either (a) consistent across the primary and
general election, or (b) they were only discussed in one stage or the other. For
examples of (a), across the primary and general elections of 2008, Barack
Obama consistently advocated for a US$4,000 tax credit to make college
affordable, for expanding the Child Tax Credit, for eliminating insurance discrimination for preexisting health conditions, and for increasing mandatory
fuel standards for automobiles. And across the primary and general elections
of 2012, Mitt Romney consistently called for repealing the Affordable Care
Act, for deregulating the coal mining industry, for increasing limits and
incentives for high-skilled immigration, and for school vouchers.
   For examples of (b), we can consider John McCain’s “gas tax holiday,”
which he first proposed a month after securing the Republican nomination as
a solution to rising gas prices. McCain also proposed a tax credit for individuals who purchase zero emission vehicles in the general election, but had spoken of no such proposal during the primary election. Obama similarly
proposed raising the cap on the Social Security tax during the 2008 general
election, but had not voiced the proposal during the primary. Both Romney
and McCain endorsed a temporary worker visa program during their respective general election campaigns, but did not address this policy during the
Republican primaries.
   Thus, to the extent that candidates indicate policy shifts in response to a
changing electorate, it occurs only in the proposal of new policy ideas, not
changing existing commitments. Yet in our evaluation of the corpus, we neither find this to be prevalent—happening only a few times between the three
candidates—nor does it consistently point to moderation. Proposing temporary worker programs appears more centrist than conservative; neither gas
tax holidays nor Obama’s Social Security tax appears more moderate than
liberal.
   Our second observation concerns the nature of moderation in language.
We note a consistent shift in how issues are discussed by candidates between
primary and general campaigns, and some evidence of shifting issue


28                                               American Politics Research 00(0)

attention. Mitt Romney, for instance, discussed abortion many times, and
with conviction, during the 2012 Republican primary: advocating the Hyde
Amendment, the overturning of Roe v. Wade, and cutting funding to Planned
Parenthood. During the general election, Romney was largely silent on this
score, making only two statements on abortion: once praising his vice presidential nominee Paul Ryan for his position on the “sanctity of every human
life,” and once more vowing to “protect the sanctity of life” during his address
to the Republican National Convention, an audience composed heavily of
members of the partisan base.
    John McCain shows a similar pattern when speaking on immigration during the 2008 cycle. During the primary, McCain prefaced immigration statements by asserting that America needed to “secure our borders first,” and
only a couple of times did he refer to his previous bipartisan comprehensive
immigration reform proposals.15 In the general election, McCain maintained
his position on border security, even explicitly telling CNN anchor Wolf
Blitzer that he has “not changed [his] position” on immigration. Yet during
the general election, McCain’s explanation did shift toward sympathy, with
McCain making new references to immigrants as “God’s children” seeking a
better life in the United States.
    This pattern, in fact, holds across many issues and all three candidates.
Romney spoke often of taxes during the 2012 election, but mostly of “cutting
taxes” during the primary, and of not “raising taxes” during the general. McCain
frequently vowed to make the “Bush tax cuts permanent” while campaigning
during the Republican primary, but never used the phrase during his general
election speeches, preferring instead to refer only generically to keeping tax cuts
in place. Obama maintained a pro-union stance during the 2008 election, and he
spoke extensively of his support of unions during the primary. During the general election, however, Obama only vaguely referred to unions, repeating the
line that Americans should not scapegoat groups for America’s problems: “not
welfare recipients, not corporations, not unions, not immigrants, not gays.”
    To summarize, then, our deeper qualitative exploration of presidential
campaign rhetoric affirms what we found in using sophisticated computational methods. We find strong evidence for post-primary moderation in presidential campaigns. Unlike the traditional definition, however, we find no
evidence of policy flip-flopping. Instead, we find evidence of rhetorical
moderation. Candidates, presented with different electorates at different
stages of the campaign, may be constrained in their ability to change policy
positions, but they can, and do, adapt the language they use to explain those
policies to voters. That shift appears to happen in two ways: by changing
focus away from “red meat” issues for party bases, by and reframing positions to make them more palatable to a general electorate.


Acree et al.                                                                        29

    As we noted at the outset, these findings are normatively troubling. In a
democracy, voters are charged with selecting the candidate who will best
represent their ideological (as well as other) interests. And one significant
way that voters learn about candidates’ ideology is through candidate rhetoric. Our evidence that candidates retain relatively fixed policy positions but
morph their language, chameleon-like, from appearing more extreme to
appearing more moderate means that voters are, at least at some point during
the campaign, receiving misleading cues. Are these cues strong enough to
influence vote choice? Probably not, in the case of most voters. But they matter, nonetheless, if we are led to believe that a candidate’s judgment is similar
to our own and subsequently surprised to learn it is not. And in the modern
era, where it seems candidates are increasingly able to “get away” with communicating less substance and more generalities via outlets such as Twitter,
we contend that our findings in support of the rhetorical moderation theory
matter now more than ever.
    This research project moves American political research forward in two
major ways. First, we provide the first systematic evidence for the academic and popular intuition behind post-primary moderation. By employing text analytic tools, we gain leverage on a claim that—while obvious
according to folk wisdom—has evaded systematic empirical measurement
for decades. Second, and perhaps more excitingly, we open up a new and
fruitful area for future study. It remains an open question how well voters
may, or may not, perceive subtle rhetorical differences. As with any campaign message, the fact that candidates seem to carefully craft their ideological moderation may (or may not) mean the strategy has a significant
effect on voters.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: This research was supported by National
Science Foundation grants #1211201, #1211266, and #1211277, under the SocialComputational Systems program (SoCS).

Supplemental Material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.


30                                                 American Politics Research 00(0)

Notes
 1. The Etch-a-Sketch is a classic American toy, introduced in 1960, that allows
    users to “draw” pictures by turning two knobs that control vertical and horizontal
    movement of a stylus. The stylus works by scraping off aluminum shavings that
    coat the inside of the toy’s screen. To erase a drawing and begin again, one turns
    the toy over and shakes it to recoat the screen.
 2. Consider attention in 2016 Democratic primaries to which candidates were willing to say that “Black lives matter.”
 3. The most frequently confused were Religious Left and Religious Right, drawing
    as they did on a number of terms common to both and uncommon elsewhere.
 4. These data management choices serve two purposes. First, they help us to reduce
    noise in the data by combining words with common stems (so that, for example,
    plurals and singulars are counted as the same rather than separate words), and by
    removing stop words that play important grammatical but little semantic roles
    in language, and thus do not aid us in measuring ideological content in speech.
    Second, we recognize the important meaning conveyed in multiword expressions
    that we would lose if we considered words in isolation. If we ignored phrases, we
    might break up expressions like “illegal immigration” into the unigrams “illegal”
    and “immigration.” To do so would ignore the inferential power gained from
    knowing that an author routinely writes not just of illegality or of immigration,
    but specifically of illegal immigration.
 5. One can also cast this as an constrained optimization problem with 1
    regularization.
 6. In earlier work, the current and other authors have referred to this simply as the
    Ideological Books Corpus.
 7. We use the sparse additive generative model (SAGE) weights as priors, and add
    some smoothing so (a) any word has some nonzero probability of being emitted from all ideological states, but (b) words with nonzero SAGE weights for a
    particular ideological class or subclass will have a higher probability a priori of
    being emitted from that (sub)class.
 8. In practice, this works well except when a speaker goes for a long time without
    using an ideological cue term. In such cases, the lag period appears large, and
    the time-splitting assumption inflates the importance of the previous and current
    ideological states. That is, long lags might mean that the speaker has simply
    switched to talking about nonideological topics, rather than that they have split
    their time between the previous and current state. To address this, we also introduce a reset parameter, which allows the model to reset the ideological state
    back to the background (i.e., nonideological) state. The probability of resetting
    increases with lag length, and the reset indicator is sampled at each (cue or lag)
    term emission.
 9. The length of the sequence is assumed to be exogenous, so that no stop state
    needs to be defined.
10. To ensure that our results are not simply driven by our model selection, we also
    estimated candidates’ use of ideological language with a simple bag-of-words


Acree et al.                                                                           31

      approach. The results from the finite mixture model tell the same substantive
      story as the ones we present in the “Results” section, though face validity suffers
      in this approach.
11.   In our data, we have only a few self-described centrists and we estimate very
      few tokens that distinguish the Centrist class from the others. In the data, what
      seems to distinguish the Centrist class is not a unique rhetorical style, but rather
      a tendency to borrow language from both the left and right classes.
12.   Recall that these are not “positions” but rather a visual representation classification proportions.
13.   As Figure 3 shows most clearly, John McCain makes for an interesting example
      of the rhetorical moderation hypothesis in practice. Not only did McCain make
      a sizable shift toward the center, but he also increased his use of centrist phrases
      (posterior probability ≈ 0.98), which is why his liberal and conservative proportions clearly do not sum to one.
14.   See http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~ark/CLIP/
15.   However, McCain did go so far as to say, in an interview with Tom Brokaw,
      that he had “stood up against my party, not just President Bush, but others; and
      I’ve got the scars to prove it, including taking up, with Ted Kennedy, immigration reform, knowing full well that that was going to hurt my chances in the
      primaries.”

References
Agranov, M. (2011). Flip-flopping, intense primaries and the selection of candidates.
    Retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2412252
Bawn, K., Cohen, M., Karol, D., Masket, S., Noel, H., & Zaller, J. (2012). A theory of
    political parties: Groups, policy demands and nominations in American politics.
    Perspectives on Politics, 10, 571-597.
Black, D. (1948). On the rationale of group decision-making. The Journal of Political
    Economy, 56, 23-34.
Brady, D. W., Han, H., & Pope, J. C. (2007). Primary elections and candidate ideology: Out of step with the primary electorate? Legislative Studies Quarterly, 32,
    79-105.
Burden, B. C. (2001). The polarizing effects of congressional primaries. In P.F.
    Galderisi, M. Ezra, and M. Lyons (Eds.) (pp. 95-115). Congressional primaries
    and the politics of representation. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Burden, B. C. (2004). Candidate positioning in us congressional elections. British
    Journal of Political Science, 34, 211-227.
Converse, P. (1964). The nature of belief systems in mass publics. Critical Review,
    18(1-3), 1-74.
Cox, G. W. (1990). Centripetal and centrifugal incentives in electoral systems.
    American Journal of Political Science, 34, 903-935.
Diermeier, D., Godbout, J.-F., Yu, B., & Kaufmann, S. (2012). Language and ideology in congress. British Journal of Political Science, 42, 31-55.


32                                                  American Politics Research 00(0)

Downs, A. (1957). An economic theory of democracy. New York, NY: Harper &
    Row.
Druckman, J. N., & Holmes, J. W. (2004). Does presidential rhetoric matter? Priming
    and presidential approval. Presidential Studies Quarterly, 34, 755-788.
Eisenstein, J., Ahmed, A., & Xing, E. P. (2011). Sparse additive generative models
    of text. In L. Getoor and T. Scheffer (Eds.), ICML’11 Proceedings of the 28th
    International Conference on Machine Learning, Bellevue, Washington, USA.
    (pp. 1041-1048).
Freeden, M. (2003). Ideology: A very short introduction. Oxford, UK: Oxford
    University Press.
Greene, B. (1973). Running: A Nixon-McGovern campaign journal. Chicago, IL:
    Henry Regnery.
Hart, R. P. (2000). Campaign talk: Why elections are good for us. Princeton, NJ:
    Princeton University Press.
Hotelling, H. (1929). Stability in competition. The Economic Journal, 39(153), 41-57.
Hummel, P. (2010). Flip-flopping from primaries to general elections. Journal of
    Public Economics, 94, 1020-1027.
Iyengar, S., & Simon, A. F. (2000). New perspectives and evidence on political communication and campaign effects. Annual Review of Psychology, 51, 149-169.
King, G., & Lowe, W. (2003). An automated information extraction tool for international conflict data with performance as good as human coders: A rare events
    evaluation design. International Organization, 57, 617-642.
Lane, R. E. (1962). Political ideology: Why the American common man believes
    what he does. New York: The Free Press.
Laver, M., Benoit, K., & Garry, J. (2003). Extracting policy positions from political
    texts using words as data. American Political Science Review, 97, 311-331.
Lowe, W., Benoit, K., Mikhaylov, S., & Laver, M. (2011). Scaling policy preferences
    from coded political texts. Legislative Studies Quarterly, 36, 123-155.
Meirowitz, A. (2005). Informational party primaries and strategic ambiguity. Journal
    of Theoretical Politics, 17, 107-136.
Monroe, B. L., Colaresi, M. P., & Quinn, K. M. (2008). Fightin’words: Lexical feature selection and evaluation for identifying the content of political conflict.
    Political Analysis, 16, 372-403.
Monroe, B. L., & Schrodt, P. A. (2008). Introduction to the special issue: The statistical analysis of political text. Political Analysis, 16, 351-355.
Nelson, T. E. (2004). Policy goals, public rhetoric, and political attitudes. Journal of
    Politics, 66, 581-605.
Powell, G. B. (2000). Elections as instruments of democracy: Majoritarian and proportional visions (Vol. 1). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Sim, Y., Acree, B., Gross, J. H., & Smith, N. A. (2013). Measuring ideological
    proportions in political speeches. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on
    Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Seattle, Washington, USA.
    The Association for Computational Linguistics.


Acree et al.                                                                        33

Slapin, J. B., & Proksch, S.O. (2008). A scaling model for estimating time-series party
    positions from texts. American Journal of Political Science, 52, 705-722.
Tomz, M., & Van Houweling, R. P. (2010). Candidate repositioning. Unpublished
    Manuscript.
Tomz, M., & Van Houweling, R. P. (2016). Political repositioning: A conjoint
    ­analysis. Unpublished Manuscript.

Author Biographies
Brice D.L. Acree is an assistant professor of Political Science and Translational Data
Analytics at the Ohio State University. He studies computational methods for natural
language processing.
Justin H. Gross is an assistant professor of Political Science and Core Faculty of the
Computational Social Science Institute at UMass, Amherst. His research interests
include political communication in mass and social media, ideology as pop philosophy, and Latino politics, as well as problems of measurement, networks, and text
analysis. He is the author of several articles, appearing in such journals as the
American Journal of Political Science, British Journal of Political Science, and Social
Networks, among others.
Noah A. Smith is a professor of Computer Science & Engineering at the University
of Washington and Senior Research Manager at the Allen Institute for Artificial
Intelligence. He designs algorithms for natural language processing and its many
applications. He is the author of Linguistic Structure Prediction (Morgan & Claypool),
co-mentor of the student team that won Amazon’s inaugural Alexa Prize competition,
and winner of several conference paper awards.
Yanchuan Sim earned his PhD in Language and Information Technologies at
Carnegie Mellon University. He currently researches novel techniques for improving
state-of-the-art NLP systems at the Institute for Infocomm Research.
Amber E. Boydtun is an associate professor of Political Science and a Chancellor’s
Fellow at the University of California, Davis. She uses lab experiments, large-scale
media studies, and manual and computational text analysis to study how issues make
the news, the dynamics of “media storms,” and how media attention shapes public
opinion. She is author of Making the News (University of Chicago Press) and coauthor of The Decline of the Death Penalty and the Discovery of Innocence (Cambridge
University Press), as well as many journal articles.