The Journal of Mathematical Sociology


                       ISSN: 0022-250X (Print) 1545-5874 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gmas20


                Disambiguation of social polarization concepts
                and measures

                Aaron Bramson, Patrick Grim, Daniel J. Singer, Steven Fisher, William Berger,
                Graham Sack & Carissa Flocken

                To cite this article: Aaron Bramson, Patrick Grim, Daniel J. Singer, Steven Fisher, William
                Berger, Graham Sack & Carissa Flocken (2016) Disambiguation of social polarization
                concepts and measures, The Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 40:2, 80-111, DOI:
                10.1080/0022250X.2016.1147443

                To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0022250X.2016.1147443


                        Published online: 13 Apr 2016.


                        Submit your article to this journal


                        View related articles


                        View Crossmark data


                                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
                             http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gmas20

Download by: [New York University]                                                                         Date: 14 April 2016, At: 03:29


                                                             THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY
                                                             2016, VOL. 40, NO. 2, 80–111
                                                             http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0022250X.2016.1147443


                                                             Disambiguation of social polarization concepts and measures
                                                             Aaron Bramsona,b, Patrick Grimc, Daniel J. Singerd, Steven Fishere,f, William Bergere,f,
                                                             Graham Sackg, and Carissa Flockenh
                                                             a
                                                              Riken Brain Science Institute, Laboratory for Symbolic Cognitive Development, Wakoshi, Japan; bDepartment of
                                                             General Economics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; cDepartment of Philosophy, Group for Logic & Formal
                                                             Semantics, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, USA; dPhilosophy Department, University of
                                                             Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; eCenter for the Study of Complex Systems, University of Michigan,
                                                             Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA; fDepartment of Political Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA;
                                                             g
                                                               Department of English & Comparative Literature, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA; hHonors Program,
                                                             University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                                 ABSTRACT                                                                                      ARTICLE HISTORY
                                                                 This article distinguishes nine senses of polarization and provides formal                    Received 25 January 2015
                                                                 measures for each one to refine the methodology used to describe polarization                 Revised 16 January 2016
                                                                 in distributions of attitudes. Each distinct concept is explained through a                   Accepted 22 January 2016
                                                                 definition, formal measures, examples, and references. We then apply these                    KEYWORDS
                                                                 measures to GSS data regarding political views, opinions on abortion, and                     Belief aggregation; formal
                                                                 religiosity—topics described as revealing social polarization. Previous break-                epistemology;
                                                                 downs of polarization include domain-specific assumptions and focus on a                      measurement; polarization;
                                                                 subset of the distribution’s features. This has conflated multiple, independent               social epistemology
                                                                 features of attitude distributions. The current work aims to extract the distinct
                                                                 senses of polarization and demonstrate that by becoming clearer on these
                                                                 distinctions we can better focus our efforts on substantive issues in social
                                                                 phenomena.


                                                             1. Introduction
                                                             Though the term “polarization” is frequently invoked to describe patterns in distributions (e.g., in
                                                             opinion polls), it is not the single concept it is often taken to be. Occurrences of polarization frequently
                                                             appear in the sociology and political science literature (Baldassarri & Gelman, 2008; Bartels, 2000;
                                                             Brownstein, 2007; DiMaggio, Evans, & Bryson, 1996; Fiorina, Abrams, & Pope, 2010; Hetherington &
                                                             Weiler, 2009; Hunter, 1991; McCarty, Poole, & Rosenthal, 2008), but the specific ways in which
                                                             polarization is realized are not systematically distinguished. Often entire articles appear on the topic of
                                                             polarization, but with little attempt to make it clear what precisely is meant by the term. In those cases
                                                             in which a formal measure is provided (see Christen, Ott, & Schwarz, 2013; DiMaggio et al., 1996;
                                                             Fiorina et al., 2010; Estaban & Ray 2012), it may be specific to the analyzed dataset or topic of interest,
                                                             not fully formalized, not evaluated compared to other measures and/or presented as a measure that is a
                                                             composite of the measures presented here. Because a genuine understanding of the phenomena at issue
                                                             demands making definitions unambiguous, here we tease out nine distinct concepts of polarization
                                                             and demonstrate how each one can be made precise with an example formal measure.
                                                                In this effort we make no claims of completeness; to the contrary, we acknowledge that alternative
                                                             measures are possible within each concept and point toward further concepts beyond the nine
                                                             included here. Specifically, we are elsewhere pursuing measures that incorporate spatial and social
                                                             network configurations, but our focus here is on polarization phenomena within a distribution of

                                                             CONTACT Aaron Bramson            bramson@brain.riken.jp      Laboratory for Symbolic Cognitive Development, RIKEN Brain Science
                                                             Institute, BSI West Building 2F, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako City, Saitama 351-0198 Japan
                                                             Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/gmas.
                                                             © 2016 Taylor & Francis


                                                                                                                                     THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                        81


                                                             cardinal property values. One common example of appropriate data in the social sciences is the
                                                             Likert scale responses of one’s degree of agreement in a survey statement. These properties are
                                                             variably referred to as “attitudes,” “beliefs,” “opinions,” “views,” “tastes,” “ideas,” “attributes,” and
                                                             “properties,” etc., in the literature, but we refer to all these as attitudes throughout except when
                                                             matching the terminology from the literature. Furthermore, nonattitudinal properties such as
                                                             wealth, educational attainment, and commuting distance are also viable targets of the polarization
                                                             measures presented here. All the measures provided in this article are presented for one-dimensional
                                                             applications, though they often have obvious equivalents for high-dimensional data.1
                                                                Examples of data appropriate for the analysis presented here include opinions toward abortion
                                                             (see Figure 1), people’s political views, opinions toward women’s rights, degree of support for a
                                                             particular policy, online product reviews, and the level of funding appropriate for a budget’s line
                                                             item. The abortion figure is illustrative of the ambiguity in polarization phenomena. There are two
                                                             clear clumps of attitudes at 1 and 5 which indicates some sort of polarization. The groups are
                                                             largely steady in size and position, so whatever polarization there is, it appears to be constant. If
                                                             the groups moved further apart, then intuitively the polarization has increased—that is an easy
                                                             case. What about a scenario in which the liberal group shrinks and the moderate group increases
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             in size? Or how would the level of polarization change if both groups shrank and a sizable third
                                                             group formed at 8? A full characterization of polarization needs to have clear and justifiable
                                                             answers to these questions.
                                                                Our first purpose is to emphasize that polarization refers to a concept cluster rather than single
                                                             concept. In some senses polarization depends only on the distribution of attitudes across the whole
                                                             population, while in other senses polarization depends upon how groups within the population are
                                                             distributed. When groups are appropriate/necessary, we provide clear formal measures in terms of
                                                             both distributions of attitudes across an unstructured population with endogenously identified


                                                             Figure 1. Attitudes toward abortion, distribution by year, from the full sample General Social Survey 1977–1994 (DiMaggio et al., 1996).
                                                             Furthermore, increasing the number of dimensions also expands polarization into additional distinct senses; i.e., there are types of
                                                              polarization (such as the correlation of attitudes across multiple issue dimensions (Baldassarri & Gelman, 2008; Fiorina et al.,
                                                              2010)) that are only sensible for higher-dimensional data.


                                                             82      A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                             groupings and distributions of attitudes across exogenously defined groups of individuals. Before
                                                             moving on to applications we also briefly consider compound concepts that require combining
                                                             multiple senses; a consideration that is especially important when addressing a literature that
                                                             commonly combines or switches the meaning of these terms.
                                                                In the final section we analyze data regarding people’s political views and views toward abortion
                                                             from the General Social Survey (GSS). These datasets are analyzed by themselves and through the
                                                             lens of religiosity. Religiosity is categorized by using individuals’ response to a question regarding the
                                                             origin of the Bible. We investigate each sense of polarization for these data by applying our example
                                                             formal measures and providing a detailed report of the results. We also compare the polarization
                                                             level of political views and abortion opinions to demonstrate the use of our distinctions for both
                                                             analyzing trends and differences across issues.


                                                             2. What is polarization?
                                                             This project has three arms: conceptual analysis, formal methodology, and applied social science.
                                                             The analytical aspect comes into play as we try to better understand the concept(s) of polarization.
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             The scenario in Figure 1 has been identified as a clear case of polarization by DiMaggio et al. (1996)
                                                             and others. We must ask: “if this distribution is polarized, what makes it polarized?” What does it
                                                             mean for the distribution to be polarized? What feature(s) of the distribution is the property of
                                                             polarization picking out? Even if we can all agree and consistently pick out the cases of polarized
                                                             distributions based on our intuitions, if we cannot explain what makes it polarized (or what it means
                                                             to be polarized) then we do not have a strong understanding of the phenomena. Furthermore, even
                                                             for cases as clear as the abortion data, we do not all agree—and most cases are not nearly so clear.
                                                                 The term polarization is sometimes used to refer to a static property and sometimes a process
                                                             (DiMaggio et al., 1996). The measures we provide here are properties of a distribution that can be
                                                             captured at any time-slice of the system. The numbers produced by our measures are not intended to
                                                             be informative in isolation; rather, they gain their meaning as relative values through comparisons
                                                             (i.e., being more or less polarized). They can therefore be used to compare two different questions at
                                                             a given time (e.g., are attitudes about education more or less polarized than attitudes about abortion)
                                                             or they can be made into measures of a polarizing process through the standard approach of
                                                             measuring the change in value across time (polarization in trends).
                                                                 The comparative approach allows us to apply our concepts and measures across issues or time
                                                             without requiring new concepts or measures (Dandekar, Goel, & Lee, 2013). Because the individual
                                                             measures are themselves not comparative, calculations can be done independently and then later
                                                             compared across data, researchers, topics, or domains. A further corollary of our quantitative measurement approach is that when authors say of a system that it has “become polarized” this simply
                                                             means that the value for some measure(s) has gone from a low to a comparatively high value. That is, it
                                                             is a quantitative increase rather than being a qualitative shift implying that it possesses a new property.


                                                             3. Formal measures for polarization
                                                             This article focuses on properties distributed on a normalized spectrum along one dimension. These
                                                             properties can be anything that admits cardinal values because our formalism only depends on
                                                             features of the distribution and not on what that distribution represents. As stated above, we have
                                                             chosen to refer to the properties with the catch-all term attitudes, but they are also commonly
                                                             referred to as beliefs, opinions, views, attributes, and various other terms in the literature. We adopt
                                                             the simplest method for representing the distribution of attitudes: creating a histogram of the
                                                             number of individuals holding a specific attitude value along the spectrum. This representation
                                                             naturally captures the Likert scale data recovered from surveys and opinion polls. It can also be used
                                                             to capture more open-ended questions (e.g., “what percentage of the federal budget should be spent
                                                             on education?”) and household income values through binning or density functions.


                                                                                                                                  THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                   83


                                                                 The definitions for each of the nine senses below are provided along with example measures. The
                                                             definitions are conceptual distinctions that stand on their own, while the measures are mathematical
                                                             means to identify those conceptual distinctions in histograms of attitude distributions along a
                                                             spectrum.2 Although some of the particular measures provided here will not work in capturing
                                                             the distinct senses of polarization in every type of data (e.g., categorical or overly coarse-grained
                                                             data), they should provide clarity on the conceptual distinctions and are applicable to two key forms
                                                             of data: histograms of attitude distributions from surveys and simulation outputs of models with
                                                             epistemic agents.
                                                                 For concreteness, the measures provided here assume the following characteristics. There are N
                                                             agents, participants, or respondents: a1, a2,. . .aN. Each agent ai has an attitude value xi on a range
                                                             normalized to between 0 and 1; this is the location of that agent’s attitude along the spectrum. The
                                                             full distribution of all agents’ attitudes is written X. The set of bins used for discrete characterizations
                                                             is R. For r P R, the expression y(xr) is the count of agents occupying the bin containing the value xr;
                                                             that is, the number of agents holding attitude xr.
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             3.1. Spread
                                                             The simplest concept of polarization is the width of the field of attitudes actually represented in the
                                                             system. Without taking account of the shape of the distribution, or even whether there is continuity
                                                             between the extremes, the further out the furthest individuals are the more varied their attitudes. The
                                                             wider the difference in the most extreme views held, the more polarized the population’s ideas are
                                                             (in this sense).
                                                                 In a modeled range of attitudes, polarization in the sense of spread could be measured as the
                                                             attitude level of the agent with the highest attitude value minus the attitude level of the agent with
                                                             the lowest attitude value. This measure is also commonly called the range of the data
                                                                                                            spread ¼ max X  min X                                                       (1)
                                                                                                                            xi           xi

                                                             For multidimensional data, the diameter of the system (the greatest pairwise distance among all the
                                                             points) is the general measure of spread, of which this is a special case.
                                                                Polarization in the sense of spread is illustrated in Figure 2 with two groups (red and blue),
                                                             although the measure is clearly not group-dependent. To the contrary, the measure just described is
                                                             purposefully inclusive of the whole population; however, seeing a comparison between the situations
                                                             (a) and (b) in which the groups are largely similar but differ in their spread should aid in grasping
                                                             this as an isolated sense of polarization. Also, although the diagram represents the height of the
                                                             distributions, that is also irrelevant for the measure of spread.
                                                                An example application would consider the responses to questions such as “What percentage of
                                                             the federal budget should be spent on education?” and “What percentage of the federal budget


                                                             Figure 2. Distribution (b) shows greater polarization in the sense of spread than does distribution (a).
                                                             Specifically, we provide measures that operate on a metric space so that there is a clear ordering from one end to the other and
                                                              that distance measures are well-defined everywhere.


                                                             84        A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                             should be spent on infrastructure?” For example, spread could be used to compare the results across
                                                             years, between political affiliations, or among nations. Comparing the widths of the band of held
                                                             attitudes provides a relative measure, even if a simple one, of polarization on that question. For cases
                                                             in which data are sparse or incomplete, this may be the only reliable quantitative measure available.
                                                             The spread measure will often be correlated with the later measures such as the dispersion, coverage,
                                                             and the distance between group means because many distributions shapes constrain how these
                                                             values can change. However, for each of the other measures here an example can be generated that
                                                             demonstrates its independence (see Section 4 for more information about measure independence).


                                                             3.2. Dispersion
                                                             Another simple, and common, measure of the variation in attitudes is statistical dispersion (or
                                                             statistical variation). Unlike spread, which considers only the extremes of the population, dispersion
                                                             considers the shape of the whole distribution. Dispersion can increase when groups move apart, or
                                                             when the distribution flattens, or when the agents within the distribution move away from the
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             middle toward opposite ends of the distribution. Just as in spread, greater dispersion (ceteris
                                                             paribus) implies higher levels of polarization.
                                                                There are many measures of statistical dispersion that are appropriate for our demonstration
                                                             application, including mean difference, average absolute deviation, standard deviation, coefficient of
                                                             variation, and entropy are all candidates. For simplicity we select average absolute deviation from the
                                                             mean as our example here because this can be calculated from aggregate survey data. In our agent-based
                                                             modeling research, we also find that the mean pairwise value differences are useful. For a population with
                                                             N individuals the absolute deviation measure (normalized to be between zero and one) becomes

                                                                                                                            2XN
                                                                                                                                         j;
                                                                                                          dispersion ¼           jx i  X                                                  (2)
                                                                                                                            N xi

                                                             in which X is the mean value of distribution X. Changes in dispersion for different shape changes are
                                                             presented in Figure 3. Note that the diagrams in the figure show dispersion increasing as spread is
                                                             held constant. Like spread, dispersion does not include any notion of groups or subpopulations
                                                             because it operates on the entire distribution X. We address dispersion within groups in Section 3.8
                                                             on group consensus.


                                                             Figure 3. Distribution (c) shows greater polarization in the sense of dispersion than does distribution (b), which is greater than
                                                             distribution (a).


                                                                 Various measures of dispersion have already been invoked in both the polarization and statistical
                                                             literature. DiMaggio et al. (1996) refer to dispersion as “the event that opinions are diverse, ‘far apart’ in
                                                             content.” Just being “far apart” is not as precise as it could be because although spread is also a measure of
                                                             statistical dispersion, spread and dispersion as defined here are clearly distinct polarization concepts.


                                                             3.3. Coverage
                                                             Polarization in the sense of coverage captures the level of variation in the values held. One can think
                                                             of it as the number of distinct attitudes held or the variety of attitudes that at least one person in the


                                                                                                                                THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                 85


                                                             population holds. Although this sense is not sensitive to the shape of the distribution or even the
                                                             number of agents who hold each position, it does capture a basic feature of variation. For this sense
                                                             it does not matter how different the values are, or whether they are clumped together or at extremes;
                                                             polarization as coverage captures only the variety of distinct attributes in the population. Because
                                                             more coverage implies more different ideas, and this variety is at odds with converging ideas,
                                                             polarization is higher.
                                                                 It is important to keep in mind that this interpretation of polarization as increasing with
                                                             increasing coverage is in isolation of any other features of the distribution. It is possible to imagine
                                                             a scenario with two sharp spikes separated by a wide gap. Covering some of the gap with new
                                                             ideas would make convergence easier via some particular mechanisms. However, this measure is
                                                             independent of where the coverage occurs, and more coverage could also be created by adding more
                                                             extreme ideas. So, it is only in isolation that greater coverage tends to imply greater polarization.
                                                             A more nuanced understanding of a particular case’s overall polarization will require multiple
                                                             measures and further specifics.
                                                                 A simple way to measure coverage in a discrete (binned data) spectrum is to simply calculate the
                                                             proportion of bins that are occupied by at least one agent. Note that this discrete measure does not
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             rely on any distance measure or ordering of the values, and therefore is also appropriate for
                                                             categorical data.
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            1 X 1 yðxr Þ > 0
                                                                                              coveraged ¼                                                         (3)
                                                                                                           jRj r2R 0 yðxr Þ ¼ 0

                                                                That discrete measure, though simple, depends on the choice of bins when applied to nondiscrete
                                                             data: varying the width and/or location of bins can alter the measure for the same underlying
                                                             continuous (or fine-grained) data. We also present a continuous measure that does not rely on
                                                             binning the data. This is done by setting halos of radius ρ around each agent—for one-dimensional
                                                             data this makes an agent-centered “bin” of width 2ρ. Any portion of the attitude space within ρ of an
                                                             agent is considered covered, with the rest considered uncovered. Continuous coverage is measured
                                                             by calculating the proportion of the space covered by those halos as
                                                                                             X  X < xj  xi       xj <xi þ ρ
                                                                                        2ρ þ          r þ xj  xi xi þ r  xj  xi þ 2ρ                        (4)
                                                                                                    :
                                                                                             xi <xj   2ρ          xj >xi þ 2ρ
                                                             In some applications a further condition should be added for attitude values within ρ of the attitude
                                                             space boundaries.
                                                                 Figure 4 illustrates a case in which coverage changes while spread remains constant. Although the
                                                             height of the distribution (the number of individuals possessing that value) as well as three separate
                                                             groups (red, blue, and green) are shown in the figure, those details are for reference and irrelevant
                                                             for measuring coverage.
                                                                 Coverage is actually a crude measure of diversity, and there is a linkage between a diversity of
                                                             attitudes and those attitudes being polarized (explored in other work). Though crude, coverage is
                                                             valuable for categorical data, especially when data are sparse (i.e., the number of observations is small


                                                             Figure 4. Distribution (b) is more polarized than (a) in the sense of coverage because more of the space is non-empty.


                                                             86       A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                             relative to the number of bins/categories). The continuous version is more valuable when using large
                                                             datasets for which fine resolution is appropriate and for which the selection of bins biases the results.
                                                             When applying to higher dimensions, both the continuous and discrete versions can be applied
                                                             (although some normalization scheme should be implemented for the discrete version to ensure
                                                             comparability across the number of dimensions).
                                                                 Coverage does not capture the clustering of the data points, which is a separate polarization concept
                                                             likely crucial for many broader polarization applications. However, when comparing single- to multidimensional data, coverage is a convenient way to determine the degree to which pairs of attitudes line
                                                             up. In the simulation literature, the influential paper of Hegselmann and Krause use “consensus
                                                             (conformity)” to refer to minimal coverage, “polarization(polarity)” to refer to a scenario in which
                                                             exactly two attitudes are held, and “fragmentation(plurality)” to indicate that multiple attitudes are
                                                             held within the population (Hegselmann & Krause, 2002). Coverage converts this categorical breakdown into a measure. Discrete coverage as measured by Eq. (3) is also an accurate measure of
                                                             polarization for Axelrod’s Dissemination of Culture model precisely because it is categorical, even
                                                             though he invokes some of the other concepts below when defining the term (Axelrod 1997).
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             3.4. Regionalization
                                                             In addition to the amount of space covered by attitudes, patterns in the empty attitude space are also
                                                             relevant for capturing polarization. The number of uncovered ideas is the same concept as coverage (and
                                                             its measure is the additive inverse). However, the number of uncovered intervals (ignoring their size) is a
                                                             distinct sense of variety and hence a different way that distributions can be polarized. The more empty
                                                             regions of the attitude space, the greater the polarization is in the sense of regionalization. Essentially this
                                                             is reporting a simple version of clustering in the data in which gaps in the attributes indicate separate
                                                             clusters.
                                                                 In order to measure the regionalization on a discrete spectrum, it is sufficient to count the regions
                                                             of contiguous empty bins (including the initial space and trailing space if appropriate). For a discrete
                                                             spectrum with ordered bins R we can calculate the regionalization with the following formalism:
                                                                                                 X < 1 yðr0 Þ ¼ 0
                                                                                                          1 yðri Þ > 0 and yðriþ1 Þ ¼ 0                                   (5)
                                                                                                  ri 2R
                                                                                                        :
                                                                                                          0 otherwise
                                                             One can also define a continuous version of this measure using halos, just as we did for coverage,
                                                             which better accounts for gaps in dense datasets but depends on the choice of radius.
                                                                Figure 5 shows a scenario in which regionalization is greater despite the same coverage and
                                                             spread. The figure has three color-coded subdistributions, and there is a clear connection between
                                                             empty regions and identifying distinct groups, but that is not the current sense of polarization (both
                                                             group identification and distinctness are discussed below as separate senses). What this diagram
                                                             makes clear is that in (a) the subdistributions on the left are clustered together and as a result the
                                                             distribution is less polarized than in (b) when they are not.


                                                             Figure 5. Distributions with equal coverage and spread, but in which (b) shows a larger number of empty spaces between
                                                             occupied areas, indicating greater polarization in the sense of regionalization.


                                                                                                                                 THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                    87


                                                               Although coverage, spread, and regionalization have appropriate and useful applications, they
                                                             may be the weakest senses of polarization for many practical reasons:

                                                                 1. Many surveys report at least one response for each value;
                                                                 2. They fail to capture the locations of the attitudes;
                                                                 3. They fail to capture the frequency of attitudes along the spectrum; and
                                                                 4. Multiple, vastly different distributions will be produce identical measurements.

                                                                 Although a combination of all three does provide a rough picture, the location and frequency of
                                                             attitudes matters a great deal in capturing our intuitive notion of polarization. While the refinements
                                                             below add these features, the simple measures above are distinct features of distributions that should
                                                             be distinguished in analyses of polarization phenomena. They are most useful for sparse data because
                                                             they can still achieve exact, high-confidence results in such circumstances.
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             3.5. Community fragmentation
                                                             The core of community fragmentation is the degree to which the population can be broken into
                                                             subpopulations. As a conceptually independent sense of polarization, the more groups there are, the
                                                             greater the polarization. The number of groups, in and of itself, does not reflect the distribution of
                                                             attitudes; that is, holding all descriptions of the size and shape of the distribution constant, more
                                                             separate groups imply more polarization in this sense. Note that in some previous definitions of
                                                             polarization, a large number of groups indicated a lack of polarization (e.g., Esteban & Ray, 1994),
                                                             but their reasoning for such a relationship invoked senses of polarization we have separated from
                                                             just the consideration of the number of groups alone. The implications this has on a situation
                                                             depends on what is meant by “group” in that context. Here we consider four different ways of
                                                             understanding groups.
                                                                 The first way to think about groups is for when there is no information about the social
                                                             structure underlying an attitude distribution. Groups can be identified directly from the distribution (histogram) as collections of individuals included within the basin of attraction around peaks
                                                             as in Figures 6 (a) and (b). In this way the groups are identified endogenously by the patterns in
                                                             attitude values. This approach identifies and counts the modes in the distribution to determine if it
                                                             is unimodal, bimodal, trimodal, and so forth (Downey & Huffman, 2001).3 For example, in
                                                             DiMaggio’s figure depicting the attitudes toward abortion (Figure 1 in the introduction) we can
                                                             visibly discern a group on the far liberal (left) side, and another group in the central position;


                                                             Figure 6. Polarization increases from (a) to (b) for endogenously defined groups. For exogenously defined groups the histogram
                                                             for the entire population may be broken in to varying numbers of overlapping sub-populations, as in case (c).
                                                             Our approach here is a naive approach that simply calculates the number of modes as one plus the number of local minima. In
                                                              the data analysis presented in Section 6 we find cases in which the peak and valley differ only by a few responses, but this is
                                                              sufficient to reveal an additional group. Such cases may be better captured with a measure that puts minimal variation
                                                              restrictions on the distribution and/or counts partial groups based on the variation (see Section 5 for more ideas on combined
                                                              and hybrid measures). Another alternative is to find endogenous groups according to halo-like technique that connects bins
                                                              together into groups as long as they are sufficiently similar (Mas, Flache, & Helbing, 2010).


                                                             88        A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                             furthermore, in most years there is a third group created by an upturn on the far conservative
                                                             (right) side. So in this strict sense that data is trimodal and would result in a measure of three
                                                             groups for most years. We revisit this data in detail in Section 6.3.
                                                                Identifying groups in this way precludes the subpopulations from overlapping because group
                                                             boundaries are defined by the local minima in the distributions. There are several techniques to
                                                             identify the local minima in discrete data sets; though considerations such as smoothing roughness, bin locations and sizes, and boundary effects complicate these techniques beyond the scope
                                                             of this article. For our application of this technique to GSS and other survey data in Section 6, we
                                                             find the local minima bins as those in which both neighboring bins have greater values (or there
                                                             are multiple bins of equal value forming a flat valley). Half of the contents of minima bins are
                                                             distributed to each of the groups of which it is a border (for calculating group sizes).4 The level of
                                                             community fracturing is one plus the number of minima, that is, the number of endogenously
                                                             defined groups.
                                                                The second way to define groups is by exogenous variables. In many cases the data are organized
                                                             by ethnicity, nationality, sex, or other categories, for example, attitudes on education spending
                                                             grouped by education attainment level. Such an application can create overlapping subpopulations
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             such as in Figure 6 (c). In our data analysis section, we demonstrate both endogenous groups and
                                                             groups defined exogenously by religiosity.
                                                                A third way that appears in the literature is when the data themselves reflect an implicit group
                                                             membership. For example, for the abortion opinion data in Figure 1 (and much more like it),
                                                             authors divide the population at the center line into liberal (left of center) and conservative (right
                                                             of center) responses. The center line may cut the distribution at a valley or peak or anyplace else,
                                                             and so these user-defined groups will not generally correspond to the endogenously defined
                                                             groups. Furthermore, because this ad hoc way of distinguishing groups is data-specific and userdefined, it always picks out the same number of groups (so it is not a measure of the fragmentation). This is an approach to define groups exogenously without requiring data beyond the single
                                                             distribution of responses by making context-based assumptions about the structure of the underlying population.
                                                                A fourth way to identify groups comes from agents on networks, grids, or spatial arrangements.
                                                             Social, physical, and property relationships can all be the basis for grouping individuals together.
                                                             Furthermore, many of these scenarios allow for degrees of group membership resulting in noninteger numbers of groups and partial group membership. Measures for polarization on spatial and
                                                             network data require different formalisms even for the same senses presented here.5 This topic is left
                                                             for future work.
                                                                Exogenously defined groups provide a way to include categorical data into our analysis framework as long as it is paired with at least one property that holds ordered values along a spectrum.
                                                             Each category specifies a group, and the subpopulations are plotted together on the spectrum
                                                             according to the variable with a distribution of cardinal values. For example, in the GSS data
                                                             presented in Figure 1 we can identify groups endogenously by the shape of the distribution as
                                                             previously described, or we could group the responses into party self-identification (e.g., Democrat,
                                                             Republican, other; see Christen et al., 2013). Or we could do both and compare the results (as we do
                                                             in Section 6). It is important for this sense as a measure of polarization that the number of groups is
                                                             not known a priori because that is the feature being measured. It is therefore clear that although
                                                             there are changes in the number of exogenous groups across time and locations, it is the endogenous
                                                             sense that is more useful as a measure.
                                                              In applications to higher-dimensional data, endogenously defining the groups requires finding the manifolds of the distribution—
                                                               a well-defined, but much more complicated, similar procedure.
                                                              Even in the case of measuring the number of groups, the task is more complicated for network and spatial data. Take, for
                                                               example, the various algorithms for detecting community structure (and hence the number of communities) in networks. Those
                                                               network connections only reflect part of the story, and a measure of polarization on networks must combine the community
                                                               structure of the agents with their attitude values into a single polarization measure.


                                                                                                                                   THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                      89


                                                             3.6. Role of groups in some senses of polarization
                                                             There are other ways to identify groups (such as hierarchical clustering), and some other feature of
                                                             the population besides what we have called groups could operate as a measure of community
                                                             fragmentation. Even when the groups are defined in the way presented above, our current project
                                                             aims at analyzing the polarization in the distributions of attitudes rather than the groups themselves.
                                                             While the number of groups acts as a distinct sense of polarization, the group identification methods
                                                             described above also play a role in the measures that follow. Because the measures below require
                                                             comparisons among subpopulations or sub-distributions, different group identification methods
                                                             yield variants of the interpretations and polarizations measures to come. When appropriate, one
                                                             could use different techniques for measuring community fracturing versus the identification of
                                                             groups for the other senses.


                                                             3.7. Distinctness
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             After we have identified or defined groups, we can ask how different these subpopulations or
                                                             subdistributions are. What matters for polarization in the sense of distinctness is how well we can
                                                             distinguish the groups. The more clearly the groups can be seen as separate, the more polarized the
                                                             total population is, regardless of the distance between groups, their size, and the levels of internal
                                                             consensus (other senses described below). Another way to think about this sense is how unlikely it
                                                             would be to confuse a person belonging to one group as belonging to another one; the less likely that
                                                             confusion, the more distinct (and hence polarized) the groups.
                                                                This sense of polarization can be captured in at least a few ways. One way is to rank the groups in
                                                             order of their mean attitude values and then perform pair-wise comparisons of the distributions
                                                             using the Kolgomorov-Smirnov (KS) two-sample test (Kaner, Mohanty, & Lyons, 1980; Wilcox,
                                                             1997). The KS test is a nonparametric way to examine two sets of data and determines the
                                                             probability that they were drawn from the same distribution, without making any assumptions
                                                             about what those distributions might be. The resulting p-values for their being separate distributions
                                                             act as measures of the distinctness of the groups. A related N-sample test or Bayesian method could
                                                             potentially extend that approach for any number of groups instead of aggregating pairwise results.
                                                                In many applications a simpler measure may suffice to capture the level of distinctness. If the
                                                             groups are exogenously defined then the overlap between groups (the number of individuals in
                                                             group A that match attitude values with individuals in group B) works as a pairwise comparison. The
                                                             Jaccard distance measure captures this as 1  jA \ Bj=jA [ Bj. The Bhattacharyya distance measures
                                                             the dissimilarity between two probability distributions and could also be adapted to our current
                                                                             P pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                                             purposes: ln  r2R yAðrÞ  yBðrÞ: A less elegant measure of the exogenous distinctness of two
                                                             groups (but one that is useful for our intended data from surveys and agent-based models) is
                                                             provided by:
                                                                                                      1      X
                                                                                                          1     minfyA ðrÞ; yB ðrÞg :                           (6)
                                                                                              jAj þ jBj      r2R

                                                             This formula determines the proportion of the overlap of two distributions by normalizing the sum
                                                             of the values at each bin of whichever distribution has a lower value in that bin.6 When there are
                                                             more than two groups in the analysis, some aggregation of the pairwise comparisons must be made
                                                             that also keeps the measure insensitive to the number of groups and the group size disparities. In our
                                                             applications in Section 6 we add all the pairwise scores and then divide by the number of pairwise
                                                             comparisons: (G2—G)/2.
                                                             To visualize how this works, look at Figure 7 (a) and trace along the minimum of the two distributions from left to right. The sum
                                                              of those heights will be the area of the gray region, which is then normalized by the total population (the size of A plus the size
                                                              of B).


                                                             90        A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                             Figure 7. Distinctness scenarios of exogenously defined groups (a) and endogenously identified groups (b). In both cases the
                                                             distribution in (c) exhibits greater polarization in the sense of distinctness.


                                                                As defined in Section 3.5, borders for endogenously identified groups occur at the local minima in
                                                             the distribution. The greater proportion of individuals that exist at this boundary—the ones that are
                                                             between the two neighboring groups—the less distinct the groups are. That is, a high frequency of inbetween agents (a mountain pass) is less distinguishing than a low frequency (deep valley). Endogenous
                                                             distinctness among any number of revealed groups can be calculated via the following formula:
                                                                                           X  yðrÞ yðrÞ < yðr  1Þ & yðrÞ < yðr þ 1Þ
                                                                                      1                                                  :                     (7)
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                                                           r2R
                                                                                                0       otherwise

                                                             For endogenously defined groups, the number of group boundaries is G−1, so we normalize by
                                                             dividing by this number to take out the effect of a greater number of groups. In application one must
                                                             also account for the complication that there may be wide valleys (i.e., several contiguous empty bins)
                                                             such that multiple bins need to be included in the “in-between” zone. Since some flat areas may be
                                                             plateaus or outcroppings from a slope, accounting for this detail in identifying only ranges of
                                                             minima in a simple formula is not possible. Programing a check for these caveats is, however, not
                                                             at all problematic. Both exogenous and endogenous distinctness are illustrated in Figure 7.
                                                                 What DiMaggio et al. call “bimodality” is similar to this concept of polarization: people are polarized
                                                             in this sense “insofar as people with different positions on an issue cluster into separate camps, with
                                                             locations between the two modal positions sparsely occupied” (DiMaggio et al., 1996). They note that
                                                             “No issue represents contemporary social conflict as vividly as does abortion, the struggle over which
                                                             has become symbolic of the so-called culture wars Americans have become more divided in their
                                                             attitudes towards abortion. . .” Although we will later see that the trend is not strong, it is the case that
                                                             attitudes toward abortion between 1970 and 1990 (shown in Figure 1) reflect high levels of polarization
                                                             in the sense of distinctness because few individuals hold positions between the two large groups.
                                                                 Bartels’ analysis of voting behavior and party identification from 1952 to 1996 reveals that the strength
                                                             and importance of party identification for voting behavior dropped in the 1960s and 1970s and has
                                                             rebounded through the 1980s and 1990s. Since their lowest point in 1976, the proportion of “strong”
                                                             identifiers has increased while the proportion of “weak” identifiers decreased (although these trends are
                                                             not monotonic). Furthermore, the proportion of voters that identify as “pure” independents has reduced
                                                             while the independent “leaners” have increased (Bartels, 2000). If we assume, as most do, that the two
                                                             major U.S. political parties represent positions toward the left and right sides of a spectrum, and that (at
                                                             least some of) the independents are between these parties, then we can interpret the described change as
                                                             increased polarization in the sense of distinctness. The frequency of individuals at the locations of the
                                                             parties has increased while the frequency of individuals between them has decreased. Bartels’ information about “strong” and “weak” identifiers and “pure” and “leaning” independents suffices for this
                                                             conclusion based on the conceptual breakdown being offered, but because he does not provide numbers
                                                             for which party they identify with it is insufficient to precisely measure this dispersion.


                                                             3.8. Group divergence
                                                             While group distinctness captures how different groups are with respect to being separated
                                                             (regardless of how far away those groups are in their attitudes), group divergence captures the


                                                                                                                                   THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY    91


                                                             reverse: how distant the groups’ attitudes are without accounting for their shapes. The more the
                                                             groups’ attributes diverge the greater the polarization.
                                                                For our current purposes it is sufficient to use the normalized distances among the group means (or
                                                             the area of the convex hull of the means for more than two groups in more than two dimensions). This
                                                             measure is applicable whether the groups are defined endogenously or exogenously. When there are
                                                             more than two groups we normalize by the maximum sum of distances possible for G groups on the
                                                             interval (0,1) (i.e., when all the groups are located at the extremes near 0 and 1). For a set of G attitude
                                                             subdistributions or subpopulations {g1. . . gG}, the normalized pairwise differences in group means is:
                                                                                                                                   G 
                                                                                                                                   X              
                                                                                                                            2                    
                                                                                                      divergence ¼                   g i  g j :                       (8)
                                                                                                                        G2  G      i<j

                                                             Increasing divergence can be easily imagined as two groups moving away from each other. However, any
                                                             change that increases the distance of the means will increase divergence, which can also be accomplished
                                                             while holding spread, coverage, distinctness, etc. constant (as depicted in Figure 8). Thus divergence
                                                             captures yet another distinct and independent, though common, notion of polarization.
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                                Diverging means is an obvious and therefore a common way to measure polarization. The
                                                             examples above from both DiMaggio et al. and Bartels for distinctness also slide into divergence.
                                                             That is, because these measures were not as finely defined in their work, their analysis fails to
                                                             separate the distinct senses. Our measure tracks the aggregate distances among group means at each
                                                             time slice, which can then be compared across variables or time. Other researches have examined the
                                                             interaction terms of the group means and the year (Page &, Shapiro 1992). That and other versions
                                                             are explicitly temporal measures with more restrictions, but they are conceptually the same.


                                                             Figure 8. Attitude distribution (b) shows greater polarization than (a) in the sense of group divergence.


                                                             3.9. Group consensus
                                                             Polarization sometimes describes features of a whole population and/or differences among the
                                                             groups within that population; instead of these, polarization in the sense of group consensus reflects
                                                             the make-up of the groups themselves. Groups that are more unified in their positions are internally
                                                             less polarized for the same reasons described in Section 3.2 on dispersion. However, when there are
                                                             multiple groups, and each group is unified in its attitude, then the society is more polarized. Separate
                                                             groups that are individually more diffuse already admit to a variety of attitudes, so the less consensus
                                                             held by each group the lower the polarization.
                                                                Group consensus for polarization can be measured via any of the previously considered measures
                                                             of population dispersion: aggregated in-group absolute deviations, variances, pairwise distances, or
                                                             even aggregated group spreads. For a set of G attitude sub-distributions (groups) {g1. . .gG} with
                                                             population values {n1. . . nG}, our example aggregated group consensus measure is averaged deviations from the group means:

                                                                                                                                1X G
                                                                                                                                      2X  ni 
                                                                                                                                             xj  X
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                     i :
                                                                                               group consensus ¼ 1                                                        (9)
                                                                                                                                G i¼1 ni j¼1


                                                             92        A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                             As the population of each group becomes more focused on a few attitudes, the closer the average distance
                                                             to the mean is within each group, and the more polarized the population (as illustrated in Figure 9). This
                                                             holds whether it is the same set of attitudes for both groups or for other areas along the spectrum. Again
                                                             recall that this sense is independent of the other senses, so group consensus may increase even as the
                                                             coverage, population dispersion, distinctness, fragmentation, etc. are all held constant.


                                                             Figure 9. Distribution (b) shows greater polarization than (a) in the sense of group consensus.

                                                                 We have already noted in Section 3.6 that based on Bartels’s analysis distinctness increased in the
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             U.S. voting population from the 1970s to the late 1990s. That is also the case with Congressional
                                                             votes in the US. In the early 1970s, both Senators and Congressmen voted along party lines about
                                                             65% of the time; in the early 2000s, that had increased to over 85% (McCarty et al., 2008). That fact
                                                             itself does not imply that the two parties overlap less on the issue space, or that they are moving
                                                             further apart, but it does imply that individuals within the groups are moving closer to the center of
                                                             their respective groups. So these data support a claim that it is in the sense of group consensus,
                                                             rather than other senses, that polarization is increasing. Finding that the mean positions of the
                                                             parties has not significantly changed does not countervail this claim of polarization because they are
                                                             picking up different features of the distribution.
                                                                 Baldassarri and Gelman further note increased consensus among voters in terms of particular
                                                             issue domains. “Looking separately at trends among Republican and Democratic voters we find clear
                                                             evidence of increasing constraint within issue domains, especially among Republicans. In fact,
                                                             Republicans have become more consistent on economic and civil rights issues, while Democrats
                                                             have lost constraint on these issues and become a bit more coherent in their moral views. In both
                                                             groups of voters, the constraint is growing faster than in the populace as a whole” (Baldassarri &
                                                             Gelman, 2008). Clearly these require a multidimensional issue space and a measure of consensus that
                                                             aggregates for each each party how they have changed across all the issues. We do not provide that
                                                             here, but it underlines the need for extending these concepts to measures for higher dimensions
                                                             because it is clear that this feature will not be picked out and distinguishable from other forms of
                                                             polarization by approaches using correlation and mean squared errors across time and issues.


                                                             3.10. Size parity
                                                             So far none of our senses is directly affected by the sizes of the groups in a population. Our formal
                                                             measures up to this point either ignore groups completely or focus on in-group aggregates and


                                                             Figure 10. Groups with comparable sizes are more polarized than a large group with smaller outlier groups; therefore in the sense
                                                             of size parity, attitude distribution (a) shows a more polarized population than (b).


                                                                                                                                 THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                    93


                                                             comparisons of group means. However, it is clear that subpopulation sizes should play a role in the
                                                             full collection of polarization concepts. Holding the number of groups constant, a society that has
                                                             one dominant attitude group with a few small minority outliers is less polarized than one with all
                                                             similarly sized groups (see Figure 10). Although this sense is independent of the particular attitude
                                                             distributions of the groups, the reasoning here is that (ceteris paribus) a society is more polarized when
                                                             differing attitudes are held by large segments of the population rather than just small fringe groups.
                                                                To measure size parity independently of the other senses requires a formalism that is sensitive to
                                                             the sizes of the groups while being simultaneously insensitive to the number of groups. A normalized
                                                             entropy measure fits this description exactly, although for endogenously defined groups this measure
                                                             may be erratic when the groups change and/or shift boundary bins. For a set of G groups with
                                                             population proportions {p1. . .pG},

                                                                                                                                 1 X G
                                                                                                    size parityentropy ¼               pi ln pi :                                     (10)
                                                                                                                               ln G i¼1
                                                             As a revealing application of this measure, consider Americans’ opinions regarding the role of women
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             (Bolzendahl & Meyers, 2004). We ran our polarization analysis on data from the American National
                                                             Election Studies from 1972 to 2008 reporting individuals’ responses (scored from 1 to 7) to the following
                                                             question: “Some people feel that women should have an equal role with men in running business,
                                                             industry and government. Others feel that women’s place is in the home. Where would you place yourself
                                                             on this scale or haven’t you thought much about this?” (ANES, 2010). Many of our measures reveal little
                                                             change in polarization on this topic even while the mean attitude has moved steadily from 3.92 in 1972 to
                                                             1.98 in 2008. The size parity measure, however, decreased from 0.96 to 0.67 as the population moved
                                                             from three distinct and substantial clumps toward a distribution that spikes on a score of 1 (equal roles)
                                                             and falls off quickly as scores increase. In this sense (and in the sense of population dispersion) the
                                                             polarization regarding women’s rights has significantly decreased—society has both moved to greater
                                                             equality and become more unified (less polarized) on this position.


                                                             4. Measure independence
                                                             The distinct senses above are demonstrably pairwise independent within the constraints of certain
                                                             boundary conditions: for any two senses one can construct an example from two distributions
                                                             showing that an increase in one sense of polarization does not require or imply an increase (and
                                                             could be matched with a decrease) in the other sense. Throughout the exposition we have pointed
                                                             out this sort of independence and constructed our figures to demonstrate a change in only the
                                                             specific measure being described. The concepts (and their measures) are not, however, completely
                                                             orthogonal. If one sets and holds constant the value of a third measure it may force the first two to
                                                             become positively or negatively related (depending on the particular measures involved). For clarity
                                                             we now provide an example of such a case.
                                                                Recall that a suggested measure for spread is simply the distance between the maximum and
                                                             minimum observed value. Coverage is the proportion of bins in which at least one person holds that
                                                             bin’s value. And dispersion is the average distance of data points to the mean. Assume that the
                                                             distribution is not completely filling the bounded (between 0 and 1) attitude space.7 To increase
                                                             spread without varying coverage, one can (for example) move those data points located at positions
                                                             greater than the median value to larger valued bins. To increase spread without varying dispersion,
                                                             one can take occupants from near the edge and move one inward and another outward by the same
                                                             distance.8 However, if one fixes the spread of the distribution, then moving points to increase
                                                             This is one of the boundary condition caveats: If both spread and coverage were 100% of a bounded region, then decreasing
                                                              spread would imply a decrease in coverage, although the reverse is not true.
                                                             This is a second boundary condition caveat: If each bin initially only has one occupant then moving occupants to increase spread
                                                              without changing dispersion may be impossible.


                                                             94       A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                             coverage (by filling in intermediate bins) will generate a change in dispersion as well. Similarly,
                                                             keeping coverage constant while accommodating increasing spread requires increasing dispersion.
                                                                Other relationships among multiple measures exist as well. For example, if the number of groups
                                                             equals the regionalization plus one, then the distinctness is already maximal because the groups have
                                                             no neighboring or overlapping regions. We do not intend to catalog all these potential relationships
                                                             because they can be identified and explored (if useful) when they come up in specific applications.
                                                             We have included this section because we believe that it is scenarios such as these that obfuscate the
                                                             varied senses of polarization, thus creating confusion in analyzing polarization patterns. Also keep in
                                                             mind that despite their mathematical linkages the polarization senses detailed here remain conceptually distinct. The fact that they are pairwise measure independent is mostly important for
                                                             demonstrating them to be separate building blocks rather than for practical considerations.


                                                             5. Measure combinations and comparisons
                                                             Capturing the senses independently is vital for understanding the core conceptual basis of how
                                                             systems might be polarized. Further noting the connections among the measures in applications is
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             necessary to pierce through the confusion that can occur when applying these senses to data. We can
                                                             get an even deeper understanding of this family of concepts by developing measures that capture
                                                             multiple senses at once while still keeping the contributions separated. We do not claim that any one
                                                             of the above senses fully captures any particular widely used notion of polarization, but rather that
                                                             these senses constitute minimal building blocks of all such notions. These building blocks can be
                                                             combined in various ways to capture differing, richer notions of polarization while remaining
                                                             unambiguous about the features of the distribution being described.
                                                                 As an example, consider the most common measure of polarization in the political literature: bimodality. The use of bimodality implies that the population can be most usefully broken down into exactly two
                                                             subpopulations, and that a balanced deviation from a moderate position is what it means to be polarized.
                                                             Fiorina and Abrams use such a measure for American political opinion by tracing the drop in percent of
                                                             respondents labeled moderate combined with balanced redistribution to both sides of the moderate
                                                             position (accumulation to only one side did not count as a polarizing trend to them) (Fiorina et al., 2010).
                                                                 Increases in the bimodality of a distribution can be broken down into increases in several senses
                                                             of polarization identified here; that is, it is a combination measure of our building block senses.
                                                             Community fragmentation clearly plays a role because it is important that there are two distinguishable groups. The distinctness of those groups is also important; Fiorina and Abrams are invoking
                                                             distinctness when they measure the drop in moderate view holders. Group divergence and spread are
                                                             also included because these increase when equal numbers of responses move to both sides (but less
                                                             so when they move disproportionately to one side). Neither group consensus nor size parity are
                                                             explicitly invoked with bimodality, although if there is too little consensus or size parity then the
                                                             groups may not be visibly discernible as such.
                                                                 Bimodality aggregates at least three (and up to six) distinct senses of polarization, but the problem
                                                             with this combination is that, while looking at the same data series, one author can claim that bimodality
                                                             is increasing while another claims it is decreasing. For example, the two groups could become more
                                                             divergent (increasing average distance to the mean) while the distinctness (lack of individuals at
                                                             moderate positions) is decreasing. By separating our measures more finely, we can identify both of
                                                             these changes and focus our discussion on the substantive importance of both trends rather than a
                                                             semantic disagreement over whether there is polarization and its appropriate measurement.
                                                                 Bimodality is not the only extant polarization measure that can be easily broken down. In
                                                             Axelrod’s well-known model of the dissemination of culture, polarization is characterized by the
                                                             appearance of regions which are internally homogeneous and have no attributes in common with the
                                                             other internally homogeneous regions (Axelrod, 1997). In this case the groups are endogenously
                                                             defined, and the more groups the greater the polarization. But it also requires group consensus and
                                                             distinctness of the agents’ traits. Axelrod’s meaning of ‘polarization’ nicely breaks down into the


                                                                                                                                 THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY   95


                                                             concepts offered in this paper even though the traits of the agents are not cardinal values and
                                                             therefore other measures would be required to quantify some aspects of the polarization. As it turns
                                                             out, due to the specifics of Axelrod’s model, coverage as defined above succeeds in capturing almost
                                                             exactly the quantity that he identifies even though his description evokes the other concepts.9
                                                                Another example of a combined measure is the notion of polarization used by Estaban and Ray:
                                                             “Suppose that the population is grouped into significantly sized ‘clusters,’ such that each cluster is
                                                             very ‘similar’ in terms of the attributes of its members, but different clusters have members with very
                                                             ‘dissimilar’ attributes. In that case we would say that the society is ‘polarized’” (Esteban & Ray, 1994).
                                                             This version of polarization combines (at least) three senses in our breakdown: (1) there needs to be
                                                             at least two discernible groups that are both (2) widely divergent and (3) have a strong group
                                                             consensus. For Estaban and Ray’s purpose, of teasing out conditions ripe for social unrest, this
                                                             combination may be the most appropriate, and seeing it as a combination of features facilitates a
                                                             more refined analysis and a deeper comparison to other polarization phenomena.
                                                                Flache and Macy’s definition is similar: “By ‘polarization’ we mean that a population divides into
                                                             a small number of factions with high internal consensus and sharp disagreement between them”
                                                             (Flache & Macy, 2011). For Flache and Macy, “sharp disagreement” seems to imply distinctness
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             either in place of, or in addition to, divergence combined with the existence of multiple groups with
                                                             high consensus. These examples further highlight that polarization is a cluster concept; neither
                                                             divergence nor distinctness is necessary for polarization—no single feature of the nine presented
                                                             here is necessary, but the features can be combined to form broader definitions as appropriate for
                                                             the application at hand. Seeing them as different combinations, rather than distinct and incommensurate definitions/measures, ties the the disparate versions of polarization together without prioritizing them.


                                                             5.1 Confidence measures
                                                             A further consideration that is left out of the current analysis is the incorporation of confidence into
                                                             the polarization measures. As you will see, the analysis below uses the percentage of respondents in
                                                             each category (answer) as the frequency of that response. In some years the number of respondents
                                                             is fewer than 700 (in weighted terms), while in other years it is greater than 2,000. We do not take
                                                             account of this response rate variance in our measures. In calculating the number of endogenously
                                                             defined groups, for example, a valley with a value of 1.0 between two bins with value 10.0 counts just
                                                             as much as a valley with a value of 9.9 (although that difference in valley height is picked up with the
                                                             distinctness measure). A more refined measure of polarization of this type might combine both the
                                                             number of groups, the size parity, the distinctness, and a frequency-based confidence measure. For
                                                             our current purposes of demonstrating the value of these conceptual distinctions in measuring
                                                             polarization, these technical considerations are too far afield. Our example measures here are
                                                             intended to be indicative of these distinctions rather than recommended best practices for teasing
                                                             these distinctions out of empirical data.


                                                             6. Data analysis
                                                             Our purpose in this article is to help refine and clarify empirical research on polarization so that the
                                                             discussion can focus on the interpretive questions and substantive issues. As Hirschl et al. point out in
                                                             their analysis of religious-political polarization, “this task is both empirical and interpretive because an
                                                             empirical trend is unimportant in the absence of substantive interpretation” (Hirschl, Booth, Glenna, &
                                                             Green, 2012). They also make the case that “the research literature is divided on this question with several
                                                             investigators finding a positive trend in religious-political polarization since 1980, and others finding no
                                                             polarization” (Hirschl et al., 2012). Although it is not our aim to support one side or the other on this

                                                             The discrepancy occurs when multiple “islands” of agents coincidently possess all the same traits values.
                                                             96        A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                             debate (or any other debate), we will reevaluate the presence of religious-political polarization through
                                                             our collection of measures and use these results to reassess the support for their substantial claims.
                                                                 Although debates that cross over multiple data sets tend to burn hotter, and suffer more from
                                                             incongruous analysis approaches, we will restrict ourselves in this article to analyses that pull their
                                                             data from the General Social Survey (GSS) dataset. The GSS contains responses to questions on a
                                                             broad spectrum of topics, including many that are critical for understanding trends in political and
                                                             social attitudes. The breadth (> 5,500 variables) and continuity (1972–2012) of the GSS makes it an
                                                             excellent data source for social scientists.
                                                                 However, few of the questions have responses keyed on a 1–6 (or higher) Likert scale. Instead
                                                             they are limited to 5 values or less or have categorical answers; many are true/false or agree/disagree
                                                             questions. Although the frequencies of responses in binary or categorical data can reveal trends in
                                                             attitudes with respect to a specific question, addressing polarization in a broader topic (such as
                                                             women’s rights, religiosity, or intellectualism) typically requires inferences from examining patterns
                                                             in multiple questions. To measure polarization on the GSS data using the example measures
                                                             presented above requires us to limit our application to those topics with appropriate ranked-order
                                                             scoring systems.10
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             6.1. Political polarization
                                                             As a demonstration of our technique to social-political data, we first address the question of whether
                                                             there has been polarization in the American populace’s general political views. We take the normalized frequencies of the responses to the POLVIEWS question of GSS and apply the above measures
                                                             to the responses for each year the question was reported. Because we are using a single variable here,
                                                             the groups are endogenously defined and the group-dependent measures are calculated on the
                                                             revealed subdistributions.
                                                                The Hirschl et al. analysis reveals (among other things) that among some Americans (nonsouthern
                                                             Christian white males) there exists a greater degree of religious belief correlating with a greater
                                                             likelihood of voting for Republican candidates and a lesser degree of religiosity correlating with a
                                                             decreasing likelihood of voting Republican. The effect is amplified among the wealthiest quarter of the
                                                             population. Their analysis includes details that are not important for our discussion here; our goal is
                                                             not model validation. Instead, we wish to determine to what degree the kind of politico-religious
                                                             polarization detected by Hirschl et al. can be picked out and measured by our technique.
                                                                Rather than looking at specific voting behavior, we investigate the presence of polarization in the
                                                             more general political views captured by the POLVIEWS question of the GSS. The question is: “We
                                                             hear a lot of talk these days about liberals and conservatives. I’m going to show you a seven-point
                                                             scale on which the political views that people might hold are arranged from extremely liberal—point
                                                             1—to extremely conservative—point 7. Where would you place yourself on this scale?” First we
                                                             apply our measures to the political views data by itself, and then we apply our measures to the
                                                             political views data using the BIBLE question (described below) to define exogenous groups. The
                                                             POLVIEWS data for the first analysis are filtered by those respondents who also answered the BIBLE
                                                             question so that our analysis of political views here will match up in years and sample size with our
                                                             analysis below (see Figure 11).
                                                                Some measures (such as spread, coverage, and regionalization) are not relevant for this analysis
                                                             because, as is typical for survey data with a limited number of possible responses, nearly all the bins


                                                              Specifically, our technique requires ordered response values rather than categorical responses and excludes responses of “no
                                                              response,” “don’t know,” “can’t choose,” and the like. Some questions (like POLVIEWS described below) ask participants to rank
                                                              themselves on a 1-7 scale. These variables can be analyzed without analytical gymnastics across multiple variables. The ABORTION
                                                              variable we use is, however, a composite of multiple true/false questions that are added together to produce a 0-8 scale.


                                                                                                                                   THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                      97
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             Figure 11. The POLVIEWS data by religiosity category and combined. Contour plots at the top of each pair show the data with
                                                             interpolation order 2, the heat maps on the bottoms are color codings of the raw GSS data presented in the Appendix.


                                                             have at least one entry.11 Figure 12 shows the results of the relevant polarization measures to the
                                                             political views. The two most striking results in this plot are:

                                                                  1. The population dispersion climbs slightly, but not monotonically, from 1984 to 2012; and
                                                                  2. The number of endogenously defined groups, as well as the measures across those groups,
                                                                     undergo a striking and lasting shift in 1996 (see Table 4 in Appendix for the actual measure
                                                                     values).

                                                                None of the group-based senses of polarization can be measured when there is only one group, and
                                                             when groups are being defined endogenously the existence of a single group indicates a single-peaked
                                                             distribution. In order for there to be an increase in the number of endogenously defined groups, it
                                                             must be that the distribution has shifted to produce more peaks and valleys. What happened in this
                                                             case is that in 1996 the proportion of respondents who described themselves as strictly conservative
                                                             increased from 16.3% to 18.4%, which put that bin above the proportion who described themselves as
                                                              For the political views data taken together, no bins are empty. When broken down by BIBLE, in 1984 there are no respondents
                                                              who chose extremely conservative and answered that the bible is a book of fables – and that is the only empty bin. For the
                                                              abortion analysis below, there are a few scattered empty bins for the book of fables group, likely the result of low sample size in
                                                              some years. They are left out of the analysis because they do not indicate coherent patterns in the data.


                                                             98                    A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                                                   1.0                                                                                               1.0


                                                                                   0.8                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PopulationMean
                                                                    MeasureValue


                                                                                                                                                                                           MeasureValue
                                                                                   0.6                                                                                               0.6                  Dispersion
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CommunityFragmentation
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Distinctness
                                                                                   0.4                                                                                               0.4                  Divergence
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GroupConsensus
                                                                                   0.2                                                                                               0.2                  SizeParity


                                                                                   0.0                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                         1984 1985 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1993 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
                                                                                                                                   Years


                                                             Figure 12. The relevant measures of polarization by year for the POLVIEWS variable filtered by BIBLE.


                                                             slightly conservative (which went from 16.6% to 16.7%) creating a new peak at the conservative bin.
                                                             This increased the number of groups, a measure of the community fracturing sense of polarization, but
                                                             half the bump in conservative can be attributed to an influx from the extremely conservative bin (from
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             3.9% to 2.8%). The increase in polarization in this case, therefore, is not an overall move to the right,
                                                             but rather a pull in from the right that increased focus on the pure conservative bin.
                                                                 In 2000 the same thing happens on the liberal side: the pure liberals outnumber the slightly liberals
                                                             to generate a third mode in the population distribution. That doesn’t last, and the liberal side is strictly
                                                             decreasing again until 2008. At that point the trend first creates another group divide at slightly liberal
                                                             and then the number of groups goes down to two in 2012 because the 14-year conservative peak
                                                             dissolves. By itself the community fragmentation measure doesn’t distinguish where on the spectrum
                                                             the groups are occurring, only the number of groups. Although there is sometimes two and sometimes
                                                             three groups after 1996, there is no clear increasing or decreasing pattern.12
                                                                 The other group-based measures are normalized by the number of groups to isolate the individual
                                                             senses; however, the group composition clearly plays a role in determining these measures. From
                                                             1996 to 2010 there is a group divide at slightly conservative, and the size parity jumps when a third
                                                             group also forms (in 2000, 2008, and 2010). In 2012 the single group divide is at the bin representing
                                                             slightly liberal, and the conservative and moderates are all in a group together. As one can tell from
                                                             the higher than 50% population mean value, the total population leans right, so the size parity
                                                             plummets when the distribution shifts in this way. Although the direct effect of the number of
                                                             groups has been distilled from that measure, cutting the population up in different ways can produce
                                                             sudden, drastic changes in other measures.
                                                                 More important than any of these specific results is (1) the differences in the polarization for the
                                                             different measures and (2) the difference between this collection of measures and other approaches. The
                                                             population dispersion experiences a slow and steady increase despite the abrupt changes in the shape of
                                                             the distribution picked up by other measures. The suite of measures provided here capture each aspect of
                                                             that change separately to provide a thorough description of the attitude dynamics. They do not reveal a
                                                             consistent polarizing trend in Americans’ political views. Within the timespan for which groups are
                                                             observed (1996–2012) group divergence, distinctness, consensus, and size parity do not consistently
                                                             change, so we have just one sense in which the population polarized: community fragmentation.
                                                                 This one sense in which we do see polarization is connected to Fiorina and Abrams’ notion of
                                                             bimodality, although more subtle because it is not the case that moderates decrease and the extremes
                                                             increase. The extreme positions vary, but not in a consistent way. The movement is from nearly
                                                             moderate positions to slightly less moderate positions on both sides. That sounds similar to what was
                                                             intended by bimodality, but it would not be picked up by a direct bimodality detector because the
                                                             percent of moderate responses actually increase through the 1994 to 2000 period in which the
                                                              A regression analysis between the community fragmentation measure and the year naturally reveals a positive relation with high
                                                              confidence, but with so few samples (18 years) and a single variable this is not an appropriate characterization of coherent
                                                              patterns in the data.


                                                                                                                                 THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                     99


                                                             number of discernible groups increases. Our measure of community fragmentation (essentially the
                                                             number of modes) picks up lopsided changes, and it is agnostic with regard to the global distribution
                                                             of attitudes (e.g. generally normal, inverse normal, or fat tailed). It only does one thing, and it does it
                                                             precisely. Because the overall population is not appreciably drifting apart (as measured by population
                                                             dispersion and group divergence) one may be inclined to deny the presence of polarization. But
                                                             those are different senses of polarization than fragmentation, and in the sense of community
                                                             fragmentation there is an increase in polarization from the pre-1995 period that persists throughout
                                                             the post-1995 period.


                                                             6.2. Political polarization by religiosity
                                                             Although some authors have pointed to religion as being a strong driver of social polarization (e.g., Evans,
                                                             2002; Hunter, 1991), ideas differ regarding how to categorize religiosity. Following Hirschl et al. we adopt
                                                             responses to the BIBLE question from the GSS as a reasonable proxy, or indicator, of respondent
                                                             religiosity. This question asks participants “Which of these statements comes closest to describing your
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             feelings about the Bible?” Respondents must choose one of the following answers (or opt out):

                                                                  (a) The Bible is the actual word of God and is to be taken literally, word for word.
                                                                  (b) The Bible is the inspired word of God but not everything in it should be taken literally, word
                                                                      for word.
                                                                  (c) The Bible is an ancient book of fables, legends, history, and moral precepts recorded by men.

                                                                Because there are only three responses available for this question it is not recommended that one
                                                             apply our measures to this attitude distribution directly. Instead, we use these three responses to
                                                             define exogenous groups, and use these groups to run our polarization analysis on the same political
                                                             views spectrum above. For the BIBLE question, there are no empty bins for any years, so the
                                                             community fragmentation measure is entirely determined by the number of possible responses to
                                                             that question—in this case three.13
                                                                It is not surprising to find that the mean political views of the Word of God group is consistently
                                                             more conservative than the Book of Fables group. Furthermore, except in 1997 when the Word of
                                                             God groups scored slightly less conservative than the Inspired Word group, the more religious
                                                             groups were also increasingly conservative from 1984 to 2012. It is clear from Figure 13 that the
                                                             population dispersion and the average in-group dispersion values captured by group consensus are
                                                             nearly identical. Group consensus is higher because the largest group, Inspired Word, has a lower
                                                             dispersion than the other two (which are nearly identical), and the group consensus measure
                                                             averages the three groups without adjusting for their sizes.
                                                                None of the measures show high degrees of fluctuation or dramatic trends, so any claim to
                                                             polarization of political views by religiosity must be weak. The clearest sign of increased polarization
                                                             is from group divergence (the average distance among the group means). The value in 1984 is
                                                             0.1170, and the value in 2012 is 0.1774; although the rise is not monotonic, it is the case that only
                                                             two years prior to 1996 reached above 0.12, while every year after 1996 scored above 0.12. Hence
                                                             there is some indication that the average political views of the highly religious and secular groups are
                                                             crawling away from each other.
                                                                Size parity also shows a slight trend of increasing polarization: it rose from the lowest value (in
                                                             2002) of 0.8752 to 0.9589 in 2012. This reflects a sharp increase in the percentage of respondents
                                                             who gave the Book of Fables answer from 14% to 22%, most of which came from the largest group—
                                                              There are cases, for other questions, in which some response values are not given by anybody for some years. If these questions
                                                              are used to exogenously define groups, then the number of groups will change across time. As mentioned earlier, this is rare for
                                                              survey data, but when analyzing simulation models it is common for predefined types of agents to enter and leave the
                                                              population.


                                                             100                    A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                                                    1.0                                                                                            1.0


                                                                     MeasureValue   0.8                                                                                            0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                         MeasureValue
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PopulationMean
                                                                                    0.6                                                                                            0.6                  Dispersion
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Distinctness
                                                                                    0.4                                                                                            0.4                  Divergence
                                                                                                                                                                                                        GroupConsensus
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SizeParity
                                                                                    0.2                                                                                            0.2


                                                                                    0.0                                                                                            0.0
                                                                                          1984 1985 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1993 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
                                                                                                                                   Years


                                                             Figure 13. The relevant measures of polarization by year for the POLVIEWS variable grouped by BIBLE.


                                                             Inspired Words went from 56% to 46%. These religiosity group size changes do produce changes in
                                                             the political view distributions, so the do not show up in the other measures. That is, changes in size
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             parity are measures of the polarization of political views through changes in religiosity rather than
                                                             changes in political views.14 However, since the lowest value of size parity occurs in 2002 we cannot
                                                             make the claim that there is an overall increasing trend, only that the sizes of the religiosity groups
                                                             have been equalizing over the last 10 years of data.15
                                                                 The measures of distinctness and group consensus have negative trends, but only barely. For
                                                             distinctness there is a negligible increase from 1984 until the high point in 2002, after which it
                                                             declines noticeably. Distinctness went from a high of 0.7175 in 2002 down to 0.6548 in 2012,
                                                             meaning that there was an 8.68% increase in the average amount of overlapping responses among
                                                             the groups. The religiously separate groups are becoming politically less polarized with respect to
                                                             their distinctness. Group consensus reveals a more consistently downward trend, but the difference
                                                             in values is too small to make any conclusions.
                                                                 All together our measures indicate that the political polarization of the populace (1) is minor, (2)
                                                             is confined to specific aspects of the distribution, and (3) is increasing or decreasing depending on
                                                             the aspect examined. Furthermore, although the supposed religious divide certainly exists and is
                                                             reflected in the groups’ political views, it is only slowly widening. That widening may be offset by the
                                                             flattening of political attitudes within the religious groups, and perhaps a disconnecting of religious
                                                             and political views.


                                                             6.3. Abortion rights polarization
                                                             We now turn our attention to an issue that, while not directly political, is politically heated and tied to
                                                             religiosity: abortion rights. The abortion rights issue has drawn a lot of attention because it is a hot
                                                             media item and because the data so clearly reveal different modes of thought on the issue (recall
                                                             Figure 1). Previous analyses have remarked that the attitude distribution on this topic is divided but
                                                             stable (Bolzendahl & Meyers, 2004; DiMaggio et al., 1996). We already referenced abortion opinion
                                                             data in the introduction and to demonstrate endogenous group distinctions in Section 3.5; now we
                                                             present a full polarization analysis of the GSS abortion data (see Figure 14). The role of religiosity in
                                                             explaining the split in opinions has been addressed by Evans (2002) and others, but their methodologies are not directly comparable.
                                                               Because the GSS data used here are not from longitudinal studies, we are not detecting individuals changing their religiosity, but
                                                                just a reflection of changes in the cross section of social attitudes.
                                                               One must resist the inclination of assigning a negative connotation to polarization in the interpretation of these results. Here
                                                                polarization is a purely descriptive term. It may very well be beneficial to have equal numbers of people in each group in some
                                                                cases, and everybody in one group for other cases. The context determines whether high or low polarization values are
                                                                desirable.


                                                                                                                                THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                    101
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             Figure 14. The ABORTION data itself and broken down by by religiosity category. Contour plots at the top of each pair show the
                                                             data with interpolation order 2, the heat maps on the bottoms are color codings of the proportions in the raw GSS data presented
                                                             in the appendix.


                                                                The GSS has included a variety of questions regarding opinions about abortion issues that varied
                                                             by year. Overall opinions about abortion are determined by aggregating the responses to these
                                                             questions to produce a fuller time series dataset (with respect to numbers and years of responses).16
                                                             The results of applying our measures to the abortion opinions data are presented in Figure 15. Just as
                                                             before, the values for spread, regionalization, and coverage are left out because, as is typical with
                                                             Likert scale survey data, all bins are occupied yielding values of one, zero, and one respectively.
                                                                With eight possible responses, it is still the case that the maximum number of endogenously
                                                             defined groups is four. The actual number of mode-defined groups is consistently three (except in
                                                             1990 when there are four and in 2008 when there are two), but the locations of the minima that
                                                             separate these groups constantly change locations. First note that when strictly measured, the
                                                             number of modes in the data is only equal to two in a single year: strictly, speaking, the data are
                                                             not bimodal. There are two dominant peaks, but the distribution is typically trimodal.
                                                              Specifically, the ABORTION variable used here is aggregated by COMPUTE from the study /html/D3/GSS12 and reported by the
                                                              SDA tool (Thomas, 2013) as the sum of ABDEFECT, ABNOMORE, ABHLTH, ABPOOR, ABRAPE, ABSINGLE, and ABANY (Smith,
                                                              Marsden, Hout, & Kim, 2013). First we analyze the ABORTION variable by year filtered by BIBLE, and then grouped exogenously
                                                              by BIBLE (paralleling our analysis of POLVIEWS above). The composite ABORTION variable has response positions ordered from
                                                              more liberal to more restrictive, whereas the POLVIEWS had seven.


                                                             102                   A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                                                   1.0                                                                                               1.0


                                                                                   0.8                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                          PopulationMean
                                                                    MeasureValue


                                                                                                                                                                                           MeasureValue
                                                                                   0.6                                                                                               0.6                  Dispersion
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CommunityFragmentation
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Distinctness
                                                                                   0.4                                                                                               0.4                  Divergence
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GroupConsensus
                                                                                   0.2                                                                                               0.2                  SizeParity


                                                                                   0.0                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                         1984 1985 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1993 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012

                                                                                                                                  Years


                                                             Figure 15. The relevant measures of polarization by year for the ABORTION variable filtered by BIBLE.


                                                                As a result of the moving valleys, the responses included in each group are constantly shifting,
                                                             and this produces volatile group-based measure values. Volatile though they may be, there is no clear
                                                             trend of increasing or decreasing polarization (whether taken as a comparison of initial and final
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             values, rolling averages, or pre/post 1996 values).
                                                                A closer look at the dynamics reveals some further patterns. As shown in Figure 15 the
                                                             distinctness measure’s lowest value is 0.9299—meaning that at most 7% of the responses occur in
                                                             boundary bins. This holds true even as the locations of boundary bins move. This measure therefore
                                                             characterizes the deep troughs apparent DiMaggio’s figure; the attitude space between groups is very
                                                             sparsely populated.
                                                                That figure, however, misrepresents the seeming size disparity between the attitude groups. The
                                                             liberal side is a single bin with roughly 35% of the population. The group at the center position looks
                                                             much shorter, but it spans several bins. These responses all together constitute a flatter group of slightly
                                                             greater size. The shifting third group (which is sometimes between the two dominant groups and
                                                             sometimes at the far conservative side) is always small (typically less than 10%), but the size parity
                                                             measure still consistently scores around 90%. Note that if we forced there to be two groups, liberals and
                                                             conservatives, then this would heavily distort the measures of groups sizes and their similarity.
                                                                The divergence measure shows the greatest amount of fluctuation which reflects the changes in
                                                             where that third group is located. A third group on far right obviously produces greater divergences
                                                             measure values than a group located between the two big ones. The population dispersion does show
                                                             a slight increasing trend, although the magnitude of the increase is too small to make any claims of
                                                             significance. And although it seems that the less liberal group is becoming flatter over time, the
                                                             group constitution changes too much for the group consensus measure to track it. The result is
                                                             group consensus that fluctuates with the group constitution but produces no clear trends.
                                                                The overwhelming conclusion is that there is no substantial increase or decrease in polarization
                                                             levels in any sense with respect to American’s views towards abortion rights. Although there are
                                                             changes from year to year, none of them produce discernible trends. Our more nuanced analysis of
                                                             the separation of ideas reveals a consistent and persistent division of views, but not one that is
                                                             changing coherently over time.


                                                             6.4. Abortion rights polarization by religiosity
                                                             Now we move on to an analysis of abortion by the same three categories of religiosity that we used to
                                                             analyze political views (see Figure 16). Naturally the population dispersion is unchanged, and the
                                                             group size parity is the same as in the POLVIEWS analysis because the exogenously defined groups
                                                             are identical. Again there are no stark trends, and only divergence reveals sharply erratic patterns.
                                                             Recall that our example measure of group divergence is the normalized distance among the group’s
                                                             means. The mean value for the secular Book of Fables group remains nearly constant throughout the


                                                                                                                                                      THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                                103


                                                                                   1.0                                                                                               1.0


                                                                                   0.8                                                                                               0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                          PopulationMean
                                                                    MeasureValue


                                                                                                                                                                                           MeasureValue
                                                                                   0.6                                                                                               0.6                  Dispersion
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Distinctness
                                                                                   0.4                                                                                               0.4                  Divergence
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GroupConsensus
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SizeParity
                                                                                   0.2                                                                                               0.2


                                                                                   0.0                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                         1984 1985 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1993 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
                                                                                                                                  Years


                                                             Figure 16. The relevant measures of polarization by year for the ABORTION variable grouped by BIBLE.


                                                             whole period.17 During this time, however, the Word of God group climbed spasmodically from
                                                             0.526 in 1984 to 0.594 in 2012. The Inspired Word group experienced an up-swell between 1994 and
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             2008, keeping it roughly in the middle. These changes are revealed as a boost in the group divergence
                                                             measure for the period after 1996 compared to the earlier years.
                                                                Because the groups were moving apart, the divergence increased, but because nearly half the
                                                             respondents are in the middle group, and the groups significantly overlap, the overall population
                                                             dispersion increases only slightly over the 28-year period. The gradual increase only amounts to a
                                                             5.85% change in dispersion, and the increase is not monotonic. Along with that change we see the
                                                             group sizes becoming more equalized; fewer individuals take it literally and more consider it a book
                                                             of fables (although the latter remains the smallest group).
                                                                When grouped by religiosity, opinions on abortion may be becoming more polarized in the senses
                                                             that they are getting further apart on average and that the religious group sizes are becoming more
                                                             similar. The dispersion increase can be attributed entirely to the strongly and moderately religious
                                                             groups becoming more anti-abortion while not flattening out. None of these polarization measure
                                                             changes are large because neither public opinion on the topic nor people’s religiosity have changed
                                                             dramatically since 1984.


                                                             6.5. Comparison of political views and abortion
                                                             As mentioned in Section 2, our comparative measures can be used to detect trends or to evaluate the
                                                             differences in attitude distributions across topics. To demonstrate this second usage we now
                                                             compare the measures of attitudes regarding abortion to those of political views across the whole
                                                             time span. We will also briefly compare the results from the endogenously and exogenously grouped
                                                             analyses.
                                                                For the political views data, the clearest difference between the endogenous and exogenous
                                                             analysis is community fragmentation. This variable has a constant value of three for the exogenous
                                                             analysis, but reveals the greatest change in polarization for the endogenous case. This becomes more
                                                             insightful when one considers that the exogenous analysis reveals that increasing religiosity correlates well with increasingly conservative political views, but that the mean positions of these three
                                                             groups have been slowly diverging. The endogenous analysis uncovers the formation of distinct
                                                             lumps in the distribution corresponding to these religiosity groups as they move further away from
                                                             each other. The relationship between religiosity and conservatism is no surprise, but it is surprising
                                                             that the separation of the religious groups with respect to their political views sufficiently (though
                                                             not necessarily) explains the appearance of new modes in the political views distribution. This comes
                                                              The attitude of this group fluctuates only slightly around its mean value of 0.1819 on a 0 to 1 scale in which higher numbers are
                                                              more anti-abortion.


                                                             104      A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                             out despite indications that the polarization in the senses of group distinctness and size parity are
                                                             decreasing for the religious groups.
                                                                 Endogenous comparison: In light of the above connection, comparing the endogenous group
                                                             community fragmentation between political views and abortion produces a curious result. For
                                                             political views there was just one mode until 1996, with demarcation lines highly consistent afterward. In contrast, the number of groups for abortion rights was three for all but 1990 and 2008. Also,
                                                             the intergroup positions for political views were largely consistent even as the number changed, but
                                                             the demarcation lines were constantly in flux for abortion despite the consistent number of groups.
                                                             The difference is that American political views tend to be normally distributed, but with fringe
                                                             groups of varying sizes to both the right and left, while the baseline distribution of abortion opinions
                                                             is bimodal with varying proportions appearing at the anti-abortion extreme and in the broad valley
                                                             that separates the two dominant groups. With respect to the community fragmentation sense of
                                                             polarization, political views have recently become nearly as polarized as people’s position on
                                                             abortion, although the distributions look very different.
                                                                 The virtue of this fine-grained analysis of distinct senses of polarization is clearer from the
                                                             comparison of more nuanced senses. Comparing the analyses of political views after the schism in
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             1996 and abortion in which the groups are endogenously defined, we can see subtler differences than
                                                             the number of groups reveals. For example, the distinctness of these endogenous groups is consistently very high (near 95%) for abortion, but consistently near 86% for political views. Distinctness
                                                             measures the percent of responses not in boundary bins, so on average there are 2.5% of responses in
                                                             the bins between groups for abortion and between 5 and 7% for political views. The groups of
                                                             attitudes about abortion are 2–3 times more distinct than the ones for political views.
                                                                 Group divergence (normalized distance among group means) is volatile for both datasets: political
                                                             views toggles between 0.40 and 0.63 depending on the number of groups; while abortion tumbles
                                                             between 0.637 and 0.952 without being tightly coupled to the number of groups. Thus people’s
                                                             attitudes are consistently more polarized about abortion than political views in the sense of
                                                             divergence.
                                                                 The group consensus of political views stays close to the average value of 0.81 across the post1996 years. Abortion opinion group consensus has a slightly wider range around a slightly higher
                                                             value of 0.88. Size parity is similar for the two datasets—staying in the high 80s and low 90s—
                                                             although the political views data are more volatile. The overall result is that across more senses of
                                                             polarization, people’s views toward abortion are more polarized than their political views when
                                                             groups are defined endogenously.
                                                                 Exogenous comparison: With groups defined exogenously by the religiosity categories, the subgroup distributions can now overlap. The average distinctness of the groups for abortion opinions is
                                                             0.7394, and for political views it is 0.6886. So for political views there are 5.11% more people in
                                                             overlapping regions of the attitude space. The difference between these values and the endogenous
                                                             distinctness values indicates the degree to which the religiosity categories explain the modes in the
                                                             data. Although some more detailed analytics are possible, at this stage we will just point out that the
                                                             religious groups explain (in a quantitative way) the modes in the distribution of political views better
                                                             than those found in the abortion data.
                                                                 The across-time average group divergence for abortion is nearly three times the group divergence
                                                             for political views (0.3715 versus 0.1307), but groups in both data have similar concentrations
                                                             around their means (average consensus is 0.5564 versus 0.5985). Thus the largely normal distribution in political views does not breakdown into clear religious groups, but the distribution of
                                                             abortion opinions does line up. Putting these three measures together informs us that religiosity
                                                             explains a small amount of the polarization in people’s political views, but it explains a great deal of
                                                             the polarization in abortion opinions. The difference derives from a combination of multiple features
                                                             of the distributions and cannot be summarized by a single simple measure.
                                                                 Although views on abortion are cleanly separated at the population level, when broken down by
                                                             religious categories they are actually less polarized in the senses of consensus, divergence, and


                                                                                                                    THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY          105


                                                             distinctness but not of size parity. This pattern also holds for political views. So categorizing by
                                                             religiosity yields groups that are closer together, more spread out, and share more attitudes than the
                                                             modes of the data. That is not mathematically implied by the measures, and grouping by a different
                                                             variable (e.g., ethnicity or education) may reverse one or both of these relationships.
                                                                 Our more nuanced measures of polarization reveal more nuances in the value and trends of
                                                             polarization in attitude data. The added detail makes descriptions of the results more complicated.
                                                             Although rougher and more aggregated measures may make it easier to make definitive claims
                                                             about polarization in society, they fail to capture the full picture and therefore mis-represent the
                                                             subtle variations in the distributions of attitudes, and the many independent ways they may change
                                                             over time.


                                                             7. Conclusions
                                                             A clear understanding of any social phenomena demands a clear set of tools for description and
                                                             analysis. Here we focused on the polarization of attitudes among individuals along a spectrum.
                                                             That focus reflects our application interests and a desire to keep the descriptions of the data simple
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             rather than a limit to the applicability of the distinctions. The nine senses presented here apply
                                                             across disciplines and for any property distribution, whether discrete or continuous, although the
                                                             particular measures used may require adjustment to best handle particular data sets. Most, and
                                                             possibly all, of the distinct senses appear in the literature as definitions of polarization, but not the
                                                             use of an exhaustive battery of measures nor a deep look into how each measure reflects features
                                                             of the data.
                                                                 Clearly not all the senses presented in this article are by themselves equally strong matches for an
                                                             intuitive and inclusive notion of polarization, but each captures a key aspect. The senses are not
                                                             competing to be the “real polarization”; instead we recognize that polarization is a multifaceted
                                                             feature of attribute distributions and changes is those attribute distributions. Measures that combine
                                                             multiple features do have their uses, and we briefly explored them in Section 5. However, popular
                                                             measures of polarization are not of an unambiguously decomposable type that we suggest. Existing
                                                             measures of polarization can be decomposed into our senses, but the translation is not unique.
                                                             Hence we propose that capturing the independent components of polarization is more fruitful for
                                                             producing consistent assessments and comparable results.
                                                                 Our goal has been to provide and explicate a suite of definitions for polarization phenomena. As a
                                                             means to that end we applied them to sociological data on Americans’ attitudes regarding their
                                                             political views and on abortion (and a few others). These two topics were analyzed both with
                                                             exogenous groups defined by categories of religiosity, and also filtered by that same variable to
                                                             ensure the set of respondents was identical. The result of our polarization analysis is that there are
                                                             few clear trends for any segment of the data, and no strong trends of increasing or decreasing
                                                             polarization for political views or abortion from 1984 to 2012. There are weak trends, but also weak
                                                             trends of decreasing polarization in some senses. The exaggerated perception of a political divide in
                                                             the United States may derive in part from an emphasis on issues, like abortion, which do reveal a
                                                             clean split in attitudes held by groups with other salient differences (e.g., religiosity).
                                                                 The senses in which polarization is evident are not those commonly detected. For example, the
                                                             indicated trend for political views is not bimodality (people going out from the center to the
                                                             extremes), but rather a congregating of attitudes into three camps. The central position has actually
                                                             gained support as these fringe groups have broken away from the otherwise normally distributed
                                                             attitudes. A similar observation has been made for congress voting nominate scores: the mean
                                                             positions of each party have not significantly moved, but there has been a marked increase in group
                                                             consensus (Gelman & Palmer, 2011). Our preliminary polarization analysis of the DW-nominate
                                                             data revealed larger and clearer differences for both endogenous and party-defined exogenous
                                                             groups. Our follow-up in-depth analysis will determine whether there are more nuanced patterns
                                                             in the trends and comparisons of our refined senses of polarization.


                                                             106       A. BRAMSON ET AL.


                                                                In addition to the application to DW-nominate score data, we will pursue an expanded collection
                                                             of alternative measures for each sense of polarization. All the measures presented here can be refined
                                                             and adjusted in many ways—too many ways to cover in any one article. We would like to identify
                                                             (or establish) best practices for the use of these measures that match data characteristics (e.g.,
                                                             number of samples, number of bins) to the best measure(s) for that data. These refinements can
                                                             be pursued as part of applications of the senses described to other issues and datasets.
                                                                Our expansion plans take us into territory requiring more distinct senses. The first of these
                                                             expansions is into multi-dimensional data. All of the senses and measures here have applications in
                                                             higher-dimensional spaces, but we are also interested in new senses of polarization that the higher
                                                             dimensionality makes possible. As already mentioned, the correlation (or association) of ideas along
                                                             multiple dimensions is an oft-used sense of polarization left out of the current analysis because it
                                                             requires multiple dimensions. But that is surely not the only such sense. We aim to provide a more
                                                             expansive catalog of the senses of polarization that depend on greater dimensionality.
                                                                In direct connection to our own simulation work, we also plan to extend our senses of polarization
                                                             to those that exist on networks. The incorporation of a network structure connecting the individuals
                                                             complicates both the conceptual distinctions and the measurements. For example, although the
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                             distribution of attitudes will still have (say) endogenously definable groups with distances between
                                                             their means, the polarization of the structured society will also depend on whether individuals with
                                                             similar attitudes are connected to each other in the network or are in different weakly connected
                                                             network communities. Measures such as the path length among nodes weighted by the similarity of
                                                             their attitudes indicate the direction we are going, but we are still exploring the full breadth of
                                                             conceptual distinctions available for variations in attitudes across network structures.
                                                                We have started the development of a suite of senses of polarization by putting forward nine
                                                             independent ways in which polarizing features of distributions can be captured. For each way we
                                                             have provided at least one example measure and the reasoning for why greater or lesser values are
                                                             considered to illustrate greater or lesser polarization. There is a bound to how many independent
                                                             ways a frequency distribution can be captured, and while we are not claiming exhaustiveness, our
                                                             collection of nine senses is a strong start in providing a full methodology for describing and
                                                             analyzing polarization in attitudes (aka beliefs, opinions, views, ideas, attributes, etc.) in social
                                                             contexts. Using our expanded set of senses and precise polarization measures will bring greater
                                                             clarity to social analysis and allow social scientists to focus on the substantive issues at hand.


                                                             References
                                                             ANES. (2010, August). Equal role for women 1972-2008: Table 4c.1. Retrieved from www.electionstudies.org/
                                                             Axelrod, R. (1997). The dissemination of culture: A model with local convergence and global polarization. Journal of
                                                                Conflict Resolution, 41, 203–226. doi:10.1177/0022002797041002001
                                                             Baldassarri, D., & Gelman, A. (2008). Partisans without constraint: Political polarization and trends in American
                                                                public opinion. American Journal of Sociology, 114, 408–446. doi:10.1086/590649
                                                             Bartels, L. M. (2000). Partisanship and voting behavior, 1952–1996. American Journal of Political Science, 44, 35–50.
                                                                doi:10.2307/2669291
                                                             Bolzendahl, C. I., & Meyers, D. J. (2004). Feminist attitudes and support for gender equality: Opinion change in
                                                                wornen and men, 1974-1998. Social Forces, 83(2), 759–789. doi:10.1353/sof.2005.0005
                                                             Brownstein, R. (2007). The second civil war: How extreme partisanship has paralyzed Washington and polarized
                                                                America. Penguin Press HC.
                                                             Christen, M., Ott, T., & Schwarz, D. (2013). A new measure for party coherence: Applying a physics-based concept to
                                                                the Swiss party system. Advances in Complex Systems, 16(6), 1350011. doi:10.1142/S0219525913500112
                                                             Dandekar, P., Goel, A., & Lee, D. T. (2013). Biased assimilation, homophily, and the dynamics of polarization. PNAS
                                                                Early Edition, 1–6. doi:pnas.1217220110
                                                             DiMaggio, P., Evans, J., & Bryson, B. (1996). Have Americans’ social attitudes become more polarized? American
                                                                Journal of Sociology, 102, 690–755. doi:10.1086/230995
                                                             Downey, D. J., & Huffman, M. L. (2001). Attitudinal polarization and trimodal distributions: Measurement problems
                                                                and theoretical implications. Social Science Quarterly, 82(3), 494–505.


                                                                                                                            THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY                 107


                                                             Esteban, J., & Ray, D. (2012). Comparing polarization measures. In Michelle R. Garfinkel and Stergios Skaperdas
                                                                (Eds.). The Oxford handbook of the economics of peace and conflict. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195392777.013.0007
                                                             Evans, J. H. (2002). Polarization in abortion attitudes in US religious traditions, 1972–1998. Sociological Forum, 17(3),
                                                                397–422. doi:10.1023/A:1019627006778
                                                             Fiorina, M. P., Abrams, S. J., & Pope, J. (2010). Culture war? New York, NY: Pearson Longman.
                                                             Flache, A., & Macy, M. W. (2011). Small worlds and cultural polarization. The Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 35
                                                                (1–3), 146–176. doi:10.1080/0022250X.2010.532261
                                                             Gelman, A., & Palmer, H. (2011). Polarization and issue consistency over time. Political Behavior, 33(2), 225–246.
                                                                doi:10.1007/s11109-010-9136-7
                                                             Hegselmann, R., & Krause, U. (2002). Opinion dynamics and bounded confidence models, analysis, and simulation.
                                                                Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 5(3).
                                                             Hetherington, M. J., & Weiler, J. D. (2009). Authoritarianism and polarization in American politics. Cambridge
                                                                University Press.
                                                             Hirschl, T. A., Booth, J. G., Glenna, L. L., & Green, B. Q. (2012). Politics, religion, and society: Is the United States
                                                                experiencing a period of religious-political polarization? Review of European Studies, 4(4), 95–109. doi:10.5539/res.
                                                                v4n4p95
                                                             Hunter, J. D. (1991). Culture wars. New York, NY: Basic Books.
                                                             Joan Estaban and Debraj Ray. (2012, April). Comparing polarization measures.
                                                             Kaner, H. C., Mohanty, S. G., & Lyons, J. C. (1980). Critical values of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov one-sample tests.
Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


                                                                Psychological Bulletin, 88(2), 498–501. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.88.2.498
                                                             Mas, M., Flache, A., & Helbing, D. (2010). Individualization as driving force of clustering phenomena in humans.
                                                                PLOS Computational Biology, 6(10), e1000959. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000959
                                                             McCarty, N., Poole, K. T., & Rosenthal, H. (2008). Polarized America: The dance of ideology and unequal riches.
                                                                Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                                                             Page, B. I., & Robert, Y. (1992). Shapiro. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
                                                             Smith, T. W., Marsden, P. V., Hout, M., & Kim, J. (2013). General social surveys, 1972–2012. Retrieved from http://
                                                                sda.berkeley.edu/D3/GSS12/Doc/gs12.htm
                                                             Thomas, C. (2013). SDA: Survey documentation and analysis. Retrieved from http://sda.berkeley.edu/sdaweb/analysis/
                                                                ?dataset=gss12
                                                             Wilcox, R. R. (1997). Some practical reasons for reconsidering the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. British Journal of
                                                                Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 50(1), 9–20. doi:10.1111/bmsp.1997.50.issue-1


                                                             Appendix—Data and analysis results
                                                             The following tables present the data and polarization measurement values for the analyses presented above. The
                                                             numbers for the counts of respondents in each each category were pulled from the SDA web resource accessing the
                                                             GSS database. Count values are weighted using the SDA’s composite weight variable. “This composite weight adjusts
                                                             for number of adults in the household, for black oversampling in 1982 and 1987, and for problems with form
                                                             randomization in 1978–1985. It does not adjust for differential nonresponse” (Smith et al., 2013). The measure values
                                                             in these tables were calculated from the example measures presented in the body of the paper. Combined bin count
                                                             data used for the endogenous group analysis is the sum of the three groups. All analyses in the paper use percentages
                                                             calculated for each year from this SDA-corrected count data.


                                                    Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016
Table 1. Data for POLVIEWS for the group Word of God of BIBLE.
                                 1984     1985    1987      1988    1989    1990    1991    1993    1994     1996    1998     2000   2002    2004     2006   2008    2010    2012
 Extremely conservative      7    21.3     12.1    14.9      20.1    11.2    22.3    19.6    18.5    36.2    27.2     41.2    39.0    17.9    23.8    74.6    41.1    44.7    34.8
 Conservative                6    53.3     44.8    49.3     106.0    58.1    45.5    60.4    57.7   125.2   137.4    151.1   142.2    94.4   101.1   224.4   147.7   148.8   129.4
 Slightly conservative       5    73.0     34.6    55.3      73.6    46.9    53.5    37.6    57.7    95.6    91.8     97.8   111.0    64.3    65.2   138.4    96.5    83.0    92.3
 Moderate                    4   138.1    107.8   166.5     172.2   108.0   107.6   144.1   147.2   211.6   196.1    250.6   276.9   143.6   165.7   324.8   225.7   240.6   216.4
 Slightly liberal            3    40.0     34.9    43.6      48.2    29.0    30.7    45.5    31.2    52.4    40.7     67.6    55.5    26.8    36.0    85.0    40.1    55.7    47.1
 Liberal                     2    19.9     23.0    41.7      39.7    28.0    19.1    20.7    32.3    52.4    44.6     57.7    56.6    29.6    36.2    76.3    39.3    58.5    41.0
                                                                                                                                                                                     A. BRAMSON ET AL.


 Extremely liberal           1     6.2      2.7    15.2      10.1     9.2     3.7     8.5     6.9    14.0     9.8     15.9    15.9     8.9     6.1    25.6    16.2    22.7    15.2


Table 2. Data for POLVIEWS for the group Inspired word of BIBLE.
                                 1984     1985    1987      1988    1989    1990    1991    1993    1994    1996     1998    2000    2002    2004    2006    2008    2010    2012
 Extremely conservative      7     6.2      4.9    15.5      11.1     6.6     9.5    10.6     5.3    27.5    14.7     30.2    25.8    16.2    23.9    20.5    23.8    32.4    18.6
 Conservative                6    52.9     41.5    67.5      95.9    60.1    58.3    62.5    83.1   150.0   164.7    173.7   155.5   104.5   104.3   219.9   148.2   122.6   129.4
 Slightly conservative       5   101.2     80.0   109.8     135.6    76.4    91.1    77.3   100.6   166.2   158.1    197.3   162.1   109.6   120.4   224.6   149.9   121.3   151.1
 Moderate                    4   174.6    138.4   212.3     253.2   206.4   167.4   198.6   196.9   373.5   377.1    442.9   446.8   294.6   232.6   571.5   360.8   346.2   333.0
 Slightly liberal            3    57.3     48.8    87.8      99.1    78.5    71.0    66.2    75.2   146.8   139.6    139.0   117.1    94.4    81.6   165.6   107.6   108.1    91.8
 Liberal                     2    33.1     30.2    49.9      79.0    61.7    50.4    62.0    50.3    99.3    93.4    131.9   119.8    74.9    41.2   142.5    95.1   100.6    87.1
 Extremely liberal           1     5.7      3.1     5.0      11.1     8.7     9.0     6.4     6.4    15.1    10.9     18.1    35.7    18.5    11.6    27.4    20.4    23.1    26.4


Table 3. Data for POLVIEWS for the group Fables of BIBLE.
                                  1984    1985    1987      1988    1989    1990    1991    1993    1994    1996    1998     2000    2002    2004    2006    2008    2010    2012
 Extremely conservative      7     0.0     0.7      3.0      3.2     3.1     1.1     2.6     3.7     7.6     9.2      4.9      5.5    5.0     5.2     13.2    10.0     7.7     9.0
 Conservative                6     9.6    10.3     10.5     24.9    22.4    11.1    13.2    13.2    24.3    34.2     27.5     33.0   15.1    13.9     24.6    23.0    45.7    20.1
 Slightly conservative       5    34.6    10.0     41.1     34.4    24.0    15.4    21.2    27.5    43.2    54.3     50.6     39.6   26.8    26.3     61.7    42.9    43.6    40.9
 Moderate                    4    43.4    35.9     57.2     71.5    35.2    48.8    44.0    49.8    70.2    96.1    115.4    111.0   56.4    72.2    169.9   136.1   124.1   141.3
 Slightly liberal            3    16.0    15.3     19.4     33.4    22.4    17.5    24.4    24.4    49.1    43.5     59.9     52.2   26.3    28.9     81.4    49.9    64.7    64.6
 Liberal                     2    26.8    12.3     28.1     47.7    28.0    28.6    24.4    32.8    55.6    63.0     78.6     66.5   33.0    38.3    100.6    96.4    86.3    88.0
 Extremely liberal           1     8.1     4.0     12.8     11.1     9.2    12.2     6.4     7.9    22.7    18.4     21.4     33.0   15.1    17.2     33.7    18.6    27.8    32.0


                                                       Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


Table 4. Polarization measures for POLVIEWS by year filtered by BIBLE.
                          1984       1985      1987    1988    1989        1990       1991       1993      1994      1996      1998      2000     2002     2004     2006     2008    2010    2012
 Population mean          0.534      0.527     0.511   0.523   0.508       0.519      0.516      0.524     0.527     0.535     0.524     0.518    0.526    0.543    0.527    0.529   0.517   0.516
 Dispersion               0.352      0.341     0.332   0.369   0.346       0.360      0.346      0.357     0.385     0.385     0.376     0.366    0.373    0.396    0.383    0.387   0.386   0.369
 Community                0.250      0.250     0.250   0.250   0.250       0.250      0.250      0.250     0.250     0.500     0.500     0.750    0.500    0.500    0.500    0.750   0.750   0.500
 Group consensus                                                                                                     0.786     0.777     0.864    0.781    0.784    0.780    0.866   0.870   0.774
 Group divergence                                                                                                    0.379     0.391     0.630    0.386    0.382    0.396    0.626   0.639   0.430
 Size parity                                                                                                         0.876     0.851     0.926    0.851    0.884    0.857    0.933   0.946   0.753
 Distinctness                                                                                                        0.833     0.841     0.872    0.843    0.831    0.849    0.871   0.875   0.888


Table 5. Polarization measures for POLVIEWS by year for groups defined by response to BIBLE.
                                 1984      1985    1987    1988    1989       1990       1991      1993      1994      1996      1998     2000     2002     2004     2006    2008    2010    2012
 Population mean                 0.534     0.527   0.511   0.523   0.508      0.519      0.516     0.524     0.527     0.535     0.524    0.518    0.526    0.543    0.527   0.529   0.517   0.516
 Mean of Word of God             0.569     0.546   0.511   0.567   0.548      0.578      0.552     0.553     0.572     0.588     0.572    0.571    0.584    0.581    0.587   0.596   0.570   0.581
 Mean of Inspired words          0.533     0.528   0.527   0.517   0.496      0.514      0.509     0.528     0.527     0.530     0.526    0.514    0.516    0.555    0.523   0.529   0.517   0.524
 Mean of Fables                  0.452     0.464   0.458   0.450   0.468      0.413      0.455     0.449     0.430     0.461     0.425    0.421    0.438    0.428    0.420   0.421   0.432   0.404
 Dispersion                      0.352     0.341   0.332   0.369   0.346      0.360      0.346     0.357     0.385     0.385     0.376    0.366    0.373    0.396    0.383   0.387   0.386   0.369
 Community fragmentation         0.750     0.750   0.750   0.750   0.750      0.750      0.750     0.750     0.750     0.750     0.750    0.750    0.750    0.750    0.750   0.750   0.750   0.750
 Distinctness                    0.689     0.713   0.687   0.683   0.694      0.711      0.701     0.690     0.705     0.689     0.691    0.689    0.717    0.683    0.681   0.668   0.646   0.655
 Group divergence                0.117     0.082   0.069   0.117   0.080      0.165      0.097     0.104     0.142     0.127     0.146    0.150    0.145    0.154    0.167   0.175   0.138   0.177
 Group consensus                 0.621     0.641   0.638   0.602   0.611      0.592      0.623     0.611     0.579     0.591     0.587    0.589    0.591    0.575    0.583   0.578   0.578   0.582
 Size parity                     0.917     0.889   0.915   0.920   0.898      0.903      0.901     0.912     0.895     0.914     0.911    0.916    0.875    0.920    0.928   0.946   0.960   0.959


 Table 6. Data for ABORTION for the group Word of God of BIBLE.
                          1984      1985       1987    1988    1989        1990       1991       1993      1994      1996      1998      2000     2002     2004     2006      2008    2010    2012
  Anti-abortion     8     37.3      20.3       46.8    39.7    28.0        16.4       14.8       28.6      34.0      21.2       57.7     57.2     38.5     58.5     107.4     53.4    64.5    71.2
                    7     23.7      40.4       34.8    32.8    16.3        14.8       11.7       15.3      23.2      21.7       35.2     44.5     34.1     36.0     100.1     62.0    48.9    40.9
                    6     52.7      38.2       45.1    51.4    13.2        20.7       17.5       27.5      41.6      31.0       57.2     57.6     30.7     30.9      73.3     56.2    59.3    45.5
                    5     83.4      54.5       97.4    82.1    26.0        36.0       47.1       38.7      55.6      63.5      109.4     85.7     63.7     52.0     137.6     79.5    64.2    50.1
                    4     28.6      18.5       21.2    21.2    11.7         8.5       15.9       12.7      29.7      21.2       24.7     24.7      9.0     18.7      34.5     18.4    23.3    20.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY


                    3     22.2      20.2       20.2    10.1     4.1        12.2        7.9        7.9       8.6       9.8       13.2     18.7     10.1     13.4      17.9     12.2    34.4    13.2
                    2     11.4      20.3       12.9    12.2    13.8         6.4        7.4        9.5      11.3      17.4        9.9     11.0      6.7     10.2      18.8      5.3    19.7    12.4
  Pro-choice        1     50.3      33.4       67.4    36.6    27.5        17.5       30.7       21.2      63.1      52.7       59.4     67.1     37.4     45.3      72.3     45.9    36.7    52.4
                                                         Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016
Table 7. Data for ABORTION for the group Inspired Word of BIBLE.
                        1984      1985       1987       1988      1989     1990      1991      1993      1994      1996          1998       2000       2002       2004       2006     2008     2010     2012
 Anti-abortion     8     24.7      14.1       35.9       28.1      9.2     11.1      11.7      11.7       34.0      32.0          69.7       31.3       24.6       24.6       66.2     41.3     33.7     33.2
                   7     23.5      17.0       25.1       22.2     13.8      7.4       9.5       4.8       28.6      16.8          20.9       34.1       25.7       27.4       56.4     40.7     26.9     25.4
                   6     28.9      22.5       29.1       27.0     21.9     15.4      13.2      13.7       33.5      32.6          62.1       68.7       65.9       44.8       76.8     58.4     54.3     60.3
                   5     89.5      76.7      114.5       82.7     49.9     48.2      51.9      56.6      100.4     100.0         137.9      144.5      102.8       75.0      202.4    101.7     83.9     91.4
                   4     28.7      25.7       39.7       44.0     20.9     13.8       9.5      11.1       32.4      35.3          36.3       29.1       39.1       26.6       56.6     37.6     27.4     46.6
                   3     16.5      22.6       29.3       19.6      7.1     13.8      11.1       6.9       12.4      21.2          19.2       26.9       13.4       14.3       45.2     33.2     15.3     26.4
                   2     25.6      12.2       26.4       19.6     19.4     11.1       8.5      14.3       20.0      23.4          30.8       25.3       16.2       18.6       39.8     29.0     29.9     19.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                A. BRAMSON ET AL.


 Pro-choice        1    166.3     138.6      188.0      160.0     79.0     91.1      87.4      99.0      186.2     168.4         240.2      191.3      170.5      113.3      309.7    216.9    207.2    191.8


Table 8. Data for ABORTION for the group Fables of BIBLE.
                       1984      1985       1987       1988     1989      1990      1991      1993      1994      1996       1998           2000       2002       2004      2006      2008     2010     2012
 Anti-abortion    8     4.1       1.1        5.9        2.6      0.5       1.1       0.0       0.0       0.5       0.5         6.6         0.5          1.7        2.4        9.3       4.3      3.2      5.5
                  7     3.1       1.7        2.1        4.2      1.0       0.0       0.5       0.0       1.1       1.1         0.0         8.8          3.3        4.6       12.9       7.6      9.2      4.6
                  6     3.9       4.6        6.6        4.8      0.5       1.1       1.1       3.7       4.9      10.9         7.1        10.4          3.4        4.2       12.1      12.4      7.9     10.1
                  5    14.9      12.6       17.7       20.7      6.6       7.4      11.1       7.9      11.3      13.6        19.8        24.7         21.2        6.5       29.7      31.1     25.6     27.2
                  4     3.7       2.1        7.7       13.2      9.7       4.2       5.8       6.3      12.4       9.2         9.9        13.7          5.0        3.7       10.9       6.6     24.6     15.9
                  3     8.8       5.4        7.9        5.8      3.1       5.3       4.8       2.1       6.5       6.0        11.5         9.9          5.0        8.3       21.3      17.7     12.4     16.0
                  2     5.2       6.4        5.2        6.4      3.1       5.8       2.6       3.7       7.0       6.5        12.1        14.8         12.9        6.5       13.2      22.9     15.4     12.1
 Pro-choice       1    86.2      53.0      101.1       74.7     33.6      36.6      33.4      50.8      97.2      86.9       119.3       106.6         78.2       91.4      198.9     152.0    144.8    148.3


Table 9. Polarization measures for ABORTION by year filtered by BIBLE.
                                1984      1985       1987     1988     1989      1990      1991      1993      1994      1996       1998       2000       2002      2004      2006     2008     2010    2012
 Population mean                0.383     0.384      0.387    0.409    0.391     0.370     0.370     0.375     0.365     0.358      0.406      0.415      0.407     0.425     0.426    0.400    0.391   0.392
 Dispersion                     0.628     0.613      0.633    0.614    0.630     0.615     0.609     0.642     0.652     0.625      0.650      0.625      0.635     0.659     0.649    0.659    0.657   0.662
 Community fragmentation        0.750     0.750      0.750    0.750    0.750     1.000     0.750     0.750     0.750     0.750      0.750      0.750      0.750     0.750     0.750    0.500    0.750   0.750
 Group consensus                0.872     0.923      0.878    0.865    0.863     0.943     0.872     0.897     0.874     0.876      0.905      0.860      0.858     0.868     0.924    0.896    0.857   0.879
 Group divergence               0.715     0.677      0.732    0.672    0.669     0.952     0.701     0.770     0.698     0.698      0.799      0.661      0.645     0.706     0.882    0.637    0.667   0.749
 Size parity                    0.867     0.900      0.884    0.888    0.897     0.892     0.840     0.878     0.877     0.852      0.909      0.873      0.884     0.925     0.985    0.963    0.904   0.909
 Distinctness                   0.945     0.936      0.946    0.942    0.946     0.941     0.952     0.959     0.953     0.952      0.957      0.937      0.944     0.930     0.932    0.950    0.931   0.945


                                                    Downloaded by [New York University] at 03:29 14 April 2016


Table 10. Polarization measures for ABORTION by year for groups defined by response to BIBLE.
                                1984     1985    1987     1988    1989      1990    1991      1993     1994    1996    1998    2000     2002      2004    2006     2008    2010    2012
 Population mean                0.383    0.384   0.387    0.409   0.391     0.370   0.370     0.375    0.365   0.358   0.406   0.415    0.407     0.425   0.426    0.400   0.391   0.392
 Mean of Word of God            0.527    0.529   0.524    0.577   0.529     0.547   0.486     0.573    0.495   0.472   0.565   0.554    0.581     0.583   0.617    0.614   0.593   0.594
 Mean of Inspired words         0.340    0.327   0.354    0.350   0.357     0.318   0.332     0.306    0.358   0.352   0.383   0.392    0.383     0.409   0.384    0.368   0.342   0.365
 Mean of Fables                 0.176    0.189   0.187    0.224   0.189     0.167   0.199     0.147    0.139   0.175   0.173   0.213    0.187     0.141   0.190    0.191   0.196   0.189
 Dispersion                     0.628    0.613   0.633    0.614   0.630     0.615   0.609     0.642    0.652   0.625   0.650   0.625    0.635     0.659   0.649    0.659   0.657   0.662
 Community fragmentation        0.750    0.750   0.750    0.750   0.750     0.750   0.750     0.750    0.750   0.750   0.750   0.750    0.750     0.750   0.750    0.750   0.750   0.750
 Distinctness                   0.740    0.762   0.737    0.744   0.743     0.755   0.718     0.759    0.729   0.725   0.755   0.719    0.763     0.736   0.753    0.732   0.719   0.719
 Group divergence               0.351    0.340   0.337    0.353   0.340     0.380   0.287     0.426    0.356   0.297   0.391   0.340    0.394     0.442   0.427    0.423   0.397   0.405
 Group consensus                0.547    0.544   0.565    0.557   0.593     0.519   0.553     0.531    0.562   0.561   0.549   0.569    0.545     0.547   0.561    0.550   0.579   0.584
 Size disparity                 0.082    0.107   0.085    0.080   0.110     0.098   0.094     0.075    0.090   0.095   0.096   0.076    0.113     0.065   0.070    0.050   0.033   0.043


Table 11. Response frequency data from the equal role for women question of the ANES 1972–2008.
                   Score     1972       1974     1976      1978      1980      1982         1984      1988     1990    1992      1994      1996       1998        2000     2004    2008
 Equal role          1        31         33       30        38        33        37           32        41       42      51        42        48         53          56       57      64
                     2         9          9       12        10        16        12           12        15       12      14        15        18         14          15       14      15
                     3         7          8        8         8        10         9            9         9        8       7         8         8          7           7        7       5
                     4        19         18       18        16        16        17           21        16       16      13        15        11         12          11        9       8
                     5         6          7        7         7         7         6            7         5        6       5         6         4          3           4        4       3
                     6         4          5        5         5         6         4            3         4        4       3         3         3          2           2        2       2
 Stay at home        7        19         14       11        10         6         7            5         6        5       4         4         3          3           3        2       2
                                                                                                                                                                                           THE JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY