Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 79, Special Issue, 2015, pp. 214-243


SURVEYS IN CONTEXT
HOW TIMING IN THE ELECTORAL CYCLE
INFLUENCES RESPONSE PROPENSITY AND
SATISFICING

SUSAN BANDUCCI*
DANIEL STEVENS


          Abstract The value of cross-national surveys in examining how
          political and social contexts shape attitudes and behavior has been dem­
          onstrated over the past 20 years. Their vulnerabilities, such as meas­
          urement equivalence, have also received considerable attention. Less
          attention has been paid to how variations in the timing of the fieldwork
          may affect data quality. We investigate how the timing of the survey in
          the electoral cycle may affect survey cooperation and satisficing. For
          some indicators, we find support for a context effect in that reluctance
          to cooperate and satisficing decrease as an election approaches, and this
          effect is more pronounced among the politically interested. Our results
          have implications for both cross-national survey research and campaign
          effects studies in that conducting fieldwork close to an election can alter
          data quality and campaigns can influence behavior but also cooperation
          with surveys.


Introduction
The use of cross-national survey data sets to study social and political atti­
tudes has grown tremendously over the past 20 years, both because they allow
researchers to pinpoint how variations in political and social contexts shape
these attitudes, and because computer capacity has put complex modeling
techniques for multi-country data at the fingertips of increasing numbers of

S u s a n B a n d u c c i is a professor in politics at the University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. Daniel Stevens
is an associate professor in politics at the University of Exeter, Cornwall Campus, Penryn, UK.
The authors thank the three anonymous reviewers and Andrew Hattersley for their helpful and
insightful comments on revising the manuscript. This research is supported by the Economic and
Social Research Council of the UK [grant number ES/K004395/1], *Address correspondence to
Susan Banducci, University of Exeter, Politics, Amory Building, Rennes Drive, Exeter EX4 4QJ,
UK; e-mail: s.a.banducci@exeter.ac.uk.

doi:10.1093/poq/nfv007
© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf o f the American Association for Public Opinion Research.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: joumals.permissions@oup.com


Surveys in Context                                                                                215


researchers. However, cross-national surveys are also particularly vulnerable
to certain kinds of errors that can bias results and diminish the comparability
of survey responses. Some of these are well known and well explored, such as
measurement equivalence (e.g., Ariely and Davidov 2012), but other sources
of bias have received less attention, including the “period effect” of when a
survey takes place in a country’s electoral cycle.
   We use the framework of campaign effects to investigate how the timing
of survey fieldwork influences responses and response rates. Surveys are the
bread and butter of campaign and elections research. They have been used
to demonstrate that campaigns influence what people know about politics
(Chaffee, Zhao, and Leshner 1994; Franz et al. 2008), their levels of interest
in politics (Best, Johnson, and Krueger 2012), the importance they attach to
particular issues (Hetherington 1996; Johnston et al. 1992; Johnston, Hagen,
and Jamieson 2004; Lenz 2012; Parker 1995; Stevens et al. 2011), and (lack
of) ambiguity about candidates and parties (Alvarez 1998; Rudolph 2005).
Yet, these advances in our understanding of the impact of campaign contexts
also serve to raise questions about the comparability of results and data qual­
ity in cross-national studies that take place at different points in countries’
electoral cycles. For example, campaigns are said to both influence politi­
cal attitudes directly and alter the strength of relationships between variables,
providing the means by which voters are able to connect underlying attitudes
with preferences (Gelman and King 1993). If campaigns are such influences
on what people know and think about politics, is it also possible that the timing
of a survey relative to the electoral cycle affects whether respondents opt into
and are then engaged with the survey itself? In this paper, we ask whether the
proximity of (distance from or to) national elections influences two indicators
of data quality in cross-national surveys: the propensity to agree to complete
the interview and the effort invested in answering the questions (satisficing).
   In order to address these issues, we draw on both the campaign effects liter­
ature and theories of survey response. The campaign effects literature leads us
to expect that respondents’ survey responses change over the course of some­
times very long (e.g., the United States) campaigns, while survey response
research suggests that at least part of these effects might be artefacts of the
propensity to respond to the survey and the willingness to invest effort (or
optimize) in answering questions about politics and current affairs.
   Using the European Social Survey (ESS) and data from 26 countries pro­
vides us with leverage over the question of election proximity because each
round takes place over a common period of time; Round 4 used in our analy­
sis took place between August 2008 and March 2010.1 For some countries,
interviews were conducted within a few months of a national election or
I. There are 31 countries that have participated in the European Social Survey, but this varies over the
rounds of data available. Using Round 4 only and taking into account missing data on our main vari­
able of interest, interview date, and other missing data, there are 26 countries available for analysis.


216                                                      Banducci and Stevens


referendum, while in other rounds, interviews took place more than two years
before or since a national election or referendum. In addition to linking the col­
lection of survey data to contextual information such as events data (Statham
and Tumber 2013), the ESS is also ideal for examination of cross-country
survey data quality because it is renowned for its rigorous sampling methods,
its exclusive use of face-to-face interviews, and the very close attention paid
to reliability, validity, and equivalence in measurement.
   Our analysis shows that the context of the survey in terms of proximity to
a national election alters the propensity to cooperate, with reluctance declin­
ing as the election nears. On some measures, the effect of the timing of the
interview is more pronounced for motivated respondents (i.e., those who are
politically interested). There is more limited evidence that the timing of the
interview in the electoral cycle influences satisficing. Satisficing, as in previ­
ous research, tends to be driven by motivation and cognitive ability. Instead,
timing in the electoral cycle may indirectly influence satisficing by increasing
levels of motivation (i.e., political interest).


Campaigns, Context, and the Survey Response

CAMPAIGN EFFECTS AND LEARNING

While the notion that campaigns have minimal effects is no longer conventional
wisdom (indeed, while the duration of effects may be limited [Mitchell 2012],
there is a large literature that indicates that election campaigns “enlighten”
voters [Andersen et al. 2005; Arceneaux 2006; Erikson and Wlezien 2012;
Gelman and King 1993; Johnston, Hagen, and Jamieson 2004; Stevenson
and Vavreck 2000]), the implications for surveys, especially cross-national
ones, have not been fully explored. Scholars suggest that as elections draw
closer, individuals become increasingly capable of connecting “fundamentals”
such as ideology and perceptions of the economy to vote intention (Gelman
and King 1993; see also Erikson and Wlezien 2012; Johnston, Hagen, and
Jamieson 2004), and cross-national researchers have not considered what this
may mean for data quality and comparability.
   This learning, resulting in different responses, has been linked to the tim­
ing and length of campaigns by examining the effects of variation in cam­
paigns cross-nationally. Voters learn more in longer campaigns (Stevenson and
Vavreck 2000), and these learning effects tend to be larger for low political
sophisticates in countries where responsibility for policy performance is low
(Arceneaux 2006). This line of comparative research on campaigns implies
campaign effects on both short-term and long-term attitudes and perceptions,
and thus a potential influence of the context of the election cycle on survey
responses more broadly.


Surveys in Context                                                             217


   Solvak (2009) explores this possibility in terms of the relationship between
interest in politics and election context using the first three rounds of ESS data.
He finds that interest in politics increases with proximity to an election, but that
the effects are small. In order to gauge election effects more directly, Solvak then
focuses on the six surveys in the first three rounds of the ESS for which field­
work took place during an election and compares aggregate interest in politics
month by month. He finds no systematic effects of election context on interest in
politics but some effects on the variation of opinion around the mean—standard
deviations become lower as interest in politics crystallizes during elections.
   Beyond whether campaigns serve to increase interest in politics, there
is also an emerging debate about the nature of learning in campaigns and
whether prospective voters are “enlightened.” Lenz (2009) has argued that
change attributed to priming effects in campaigns is in fact simply a product
of learning, while Enns and Richman (2013) claim that much of what has
been considered part of the process of enlightened preferences is actually an
artefact of respondents growing more engaged with the surveys as elections
near, rather than a learning response to campaign information flows. This, they
argue, is more consistent with the literature showing that key fundamentals
such as partisan identification and race are “easy issues” and would not be
further enhanced by campaign information. Examining the timing of surveys
cross-nationally in a survey such as the ESS has implications for this debate,
as it allows us to examine the effects of time outside a campaign period as well
as immediately before and after an election.

PARTICIPATION IN SURVEYS AND INFLUENCES ON SURVEY RESPONSE

Parallel to the literature on campaign effects, there is research on survey
responses to questions about politics and current affairs. Two aspects in par­
ticular are relevant to the timing of the survey: survey cooperation and item
response. Survey cooperation is seen as the product of interviewer, survey, and
respondent characteristics (Groves and Couper 1998; Krosnick 1999). One out­
come of this interaction is that surveys about political and social issues are
more likely to gain cooperation from individuals who are interested in the topic
(Voogt 2004). Stoop et al. (2010) also point out that cultural context can play
a role in survey cooperation for cross-national surveys—time-use patterns and
survey traditions are examples of factors that can influence variation in survey
cooperation rates across countries. Recognizing that context matters also raises
the possibility that the timing of the fieldwork in the electoral cycle can moti­
vate cooperation, in particular when the topic of the survey is political in nature.
   In terms of item response, respondents are thought to spend effort interpreting
the question, searching for relevant information, coming to a judgment, and then
translating that judgment into one of the available responses (Tourangeau and
Rasinski 1988; Tourangeau. Rips, and Rasinski 2000). Each step is cognitively
demanding, and in combination means that responding to survey questions can


218                                                                 Banducci and Stevens


be very complex. Thus, in order to cope with this complex task, respondents
may adopt a strategy of satisficing—expending less energy on the interpreta­
tion, retrieval of information, and translation of judgments into available catego­
ries—but still offering an answer so the survey can move on (Krosnick 1991;
Krosnick, Narayan, and Smith 1996; Krosnick et al. 2002). Similarly, when a
respondent is asked about familiar substantive territory, he may average across
multiple considerations to provide an answer, but when survey territory is less
familiar Zaller and Feldman (1992), argue that he may rely on a single consid­
eration—whatever is “top-of-the-head”—to anchor his responses.
   Like survey cooperation, interviewer, survey and respondent characteristics
influence the quality of responses or satisficing. In addition to the difficulty
of the question and the ability of the respondent, the importance of the sur­
vey topic to the respondent will motivate respondents to optimize answers
(Chaiken 1980; Krosnick 1999; Petty and Cacioppo 1986). Enns and Richman
(2013) extend the idea to argue that satisficing is systematically related to the
proximity of an election: the closer the election, the fewer respondents who
satisfice. They show that those who are motivated (i.e., who care about the
outcome of the election) are more likely to base preferences on fundamentals
than those who do not care. This ability to base preferences on the fundamen­
tals does not change over the course of the campaign; what changes is the
number of respondents who are motivated to optimize (i.e., care about the
outcome). Given that the survey topic motivates both cooperation and satisfic­
ing, however, there is the possibility that those least likely to satisfice, who are
more motivated, are easier to capture in the sample, and this will increase the
number of optimizers (Kaminska, McCutcheon, and Billiet 2010).

Theory and Hypotheses
Our hypotheses are based on combining these insights from work on campaign
effects with the theory of survey response to address questions of how the tim­
ing of the survey in the electoral cycle influences cooperation and responses.
More specifically, (1) the campaign effects literature indicates that campaigns
change, inter alia, individuals’ levels of information, their engagement with
politics and current affairs, and the salience of different issues, while (2) sur­
vey response theory suggests that interest in the topic of a survey increases
propensity to cooperate or respond (Lynn 2008)—thus affecting the composi­
tion of the sample via overall response rates or response rates among a politi­
cally engaged subset of the population—as well as the propensity to optimize
responses rather than satisfice (Krosnick 1999).2
2. We do not directly compare these effects to the enlightenment hypothesis, in which campaigns
provide information that allows voters to connect “fundamentals” to vote choice, as the funda­
mentals and the choice alternatives vary across countries, making the types of analysis in single
countries where there is a range of fundamentals with a limited choice set problematic (for exam­
ple, see Enns and Richman [2013], and for an argument that the notion of “fundamentals” is also
problematic within a single country over time, see Erikson and Wlezien [2012]).


Surveys in Context                                                                          219


    First, the campaign may engage citizens and increase levels of political
interest as the election nears. Elections are pivotal events in the political land­
scape, capture the media’s attention and, while the population may at most
times be apathetic about politics, we would expect an increase in interest dur­
ing campaigns (e.g., Bowler and Donovan 2002), even if it is small (Slovak
2009) and not necessarily direct.3Therefore, if campaigns serve to increase the
perceived importance of political matters, respondents who are interviewed
closer to an election should be more likely to be motivated to cooperate and to
give considered responses.
    The theory of survey response gives us a framework for understanding how
the timing of a survey in the election cycle may alter engagement with the
survey itself and influence responses to survey items and the distribution of
these responses accordingly. Krosnick (1999) demonstrates that the topic of
the questions can increase motivation to engage in the survey—both reducing
reluctance to refuse the interview and raising the likelihood of giving consid­
ered responses (see also Brehm 1993; Groves, Presser, and Dipko 2004; Lynn
2008).4 Indeed, Enns and Richman (2013) argue that the increased reliance
on fundamentals observed during a campaign is due to increased motivation
to optimize rather than to satisfice survey responses, as opposed to increased
levels of information among respondents.
    Our analysis relies on the notion of an “electoral cycle” and not simply the
campaign period. While campaigns may intensify the amount of information
available and provide cues about the relevance of politics, the period of time
we study captures effects prior to and after the election. After the ballots have
been counted, and the winners announced, there will be a lingering effect on
the polity (Rahn, Brehm, and Carlson 1999). One mechanism for a post-elec­
tion effect that serves to engage citizens in politics, and subsequently surveys
and survey items, is through developing political efficacy and social capital.
Mobilization efforts, campaign activity, and the solidarity built through the
 “ritual of the election” all serve to extend the influence of the election beyond
election day. While Rahn, Brehm, and Carlson (1999) show that social capi­
 tal increases after an election, most attention has focused on the campaign
period in examining electoral cycle effects. However, other research focus­
 ing on the impact of “events” examines how attitudes and behavior change in
 response (see, for example, Sorrentino and Vidmar 1974; Traugott et al. 2002;
3. In our supplementary analysis (supplementary analysis III in the online supplementary mate­
rials), we demonstrate that in ESS Round 4, the probability of reporting high levels of political
interest does not significantly increase as the election nears. Furthermore, there is no opposite
effect, as the number of days after the election and the date of the interview increases.
4. Individuals selected to participate in the ESS are told that the study is “about topics which
affect you or people in your area, such as how you feel in your day-to-day life, the way the coun­
try is run nowadays, and what things in life are important to you.” As such, the stated topics can
be considered political and social. Therefore, general interest in politics could be a motivating
predisposition to participate that may also condition how survey timing influences engagement
with the survey.


220                                                       Banducci and Stevens


Boomgaarden and de Vreese 2007). If the election is understood as an event,
we would expect it to have an impact on the motivation to participate in the
survey in the post- as well as the pre-election period.
   Based on the campaign effects literature, we would expect there to be
an intensification of interest and campaign engagement closer to an elec­
tion, and based on the “election as a ritual,” we would expect that there is
engagement and efficacy that develops during and after an election takes
place. Both effects lead us to test four primary hypotheses and one second­
ary hypothesis:
   Survey Cooperation Hypothesis'. As the interview date is more proximate
to an election, survey cooperation will increase (or reluctance to participate
will decline).
   It follows that, as the election is more proximate (as it approaches or grows
more distant), the level of effort respondents put into responding to questions
will change, leading to:
   Satisficing Hypothesis: As the interview date is more proximate to an elec­
tion, satisficing will decline.
   The Satisficing Hypothesis implies that greater engagement with surveys
when elections are near produces smaller measurement error in responses,
such that recall and reporting of behavior are more accurate (Enns and
Richman 2013). If respondents are generally motivated to reflect and respond
to the survey questions more thoughtfully due to the political context, these
effects will be evident across the survey, that is, not just for questions about
politics or current affairs.
   On the other hand, survey response theory suggests that, rather than the
proximity of an election raising levels of interest in politics, politically inter­
ested individuals may be more motivated to participate in the survey and/or
to optimize and give considered answers to survey questions than the politi­
cally uninterested. These effects will be most pronounced in the context of an
approaching or recent election. Therefore, we would expect that the effects
of the proximity of an election would be greatest for those who are interested
in politics, leading to two more nuanced hypotheses about cooperation and
satisficing:
   Conditioning Hypotheses: The proximity of the election affects (1) survey
cooperation and (2) satisficing more strongly for those who are politically
motivated (interested).
   We make two notes about the above hypotheses. First, our hypotheses do not
distinguish between the timing of the interview prior to the election and timing
after the election. Based on the campaign effects literature and the election as
a ritual argument, we argue that motivated respondents should be less reluc­
tant and satisfice less if the interview happens closer to an election, whether
that is prior to or after an election. However, neither the campaign effects nor
the “election” ritual arguments make clear the strength, shape (linear or oth­
erwise), and duration of this effect. Therefore, we examine the form and type


Surveys in Context                                                                          221


(pre- and/or post-election) of the timing of the interview in the electoral cycle
in supplementary analysis (online supplementary analysis I).
   Second, there is an alternative possibility, which predicts the opposite to
the conditioning effects of interest hypothesis: the greatest effects of context
on response rates and on satisficing will be among those who lack political
interest, because those who are politically interested are sufficiently engaged
with politics such as to be much less affected by timing, while the least inter­
ested and sophisticated are most susceptible to the influences of campaigns
(Arceneaux 2006).


Methods
The data we use are from Round 4 of the ESS, which began fieldwork in 2008.
There are now six rounds of the ESS that have included 31 different countries,
16 of which have featured in every round, with typical sample sizes in each
country and each round of between 1,500 and 2,500 respondents.5 We focus
exclusively on Round 4 because it has the most countries available in a single
round, makes the analysis clearer, and has the necessary measure of survey
cooperation for our analysis, which is whether the respondent initially refused
to complete the survey.6 Based on the available data for interview date and
refusal conversion, we use 26 countries in our analysis of all items with the
exception of refusal conversion, where 13 countries are available.
   Our key indicator is the distance between an election and the interview
date, which varies across individuals. We analyze the length of time before
the election (“days until’') and after the election (“days since”) separately. The
cross-national approach allows us to compare countries with varying cam­
paign lengths, over times near and far from the previous campaign and to the
next campaign, over which levels of information about elections are likely to
change throughout the electoral cycle. This is an advantage over campaign
effects research, which both tends to focus on the United States and confines
itself to a period of time that does not extend much before the official start of
the campaign (see Erikson and Wlezien 2012).
   The European Social Survey has strict standards for probability sampling
and response rates—at least 70 percent. The attention to response rates means
both that detailed records on refusal conversions are maintained and also that
great effort is made at converting refusals. We assess the Survey Cooperation
Hypothesis straightforwardly, by looking at two indicators of respondent
reluctance: whether the respondent initially refused to complete the survey

5. Data for Round 4 of the ESS were funded by the EU’s Sixth Framework Programme within
the project “The European Social Survey European Round 4— Improving Social Measurement
in Europe.” Within each participating country, the national scientific funding body is responsible
for covering the costs of ESS fieldwork. Details on fieldwork (including response rates) in each
country for Round 4 can be found at http://www.europeansocialsurvey.org/data/round-index.html.
6. Round 6 was released after we began the analysis for the paper.


222                                                                    Banducci and Stevens


after contact was made and the interviewer’s rating of the respondent’s coop­
eration with the survey. We would expect that willingness to cooperate in a
survey about “the way the country is run nowadays” will increase as the elec­
tion becomes more proximate, regardless of whether that is at the beginning or
end of the fieldwork period.7
   Because our sample includes those who completed a survey, refusal indicates
when a respondent initially refused to cooperate with the survey. Therefore, a
refusal represents those who were, at least initially, less cooperative. We have
recoded this so that values of “ 1” indicate uncooperative or reluctant behavior
(refusal). We supplement “refusal” with a second indicator: interviewer rat­
ings of cooperation. The questions used are an interviewer’s assessments of
how often the respondent asked for clarification, answered questions to the
best of his or her ability, and how often the respondent was reluctant to answer
questions. Responses ranged from “Never” to “Always” and were rescaled
from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating a greater lack of cooperation (i.e.,
greater reluctance, lower engagement, and lower understanding) as assessed
by the interviewer. While these are not direct indicators of cooperation, they
represent underlying propensity to cooperate with the survey, and they are
items that have been used in previous research to measure resistance and to
indicate overall reluctance to participate in the interview, along with refusal
conversion attempts (Kaminska, McCutcheon, and Billiet 2010).
   In order to test the Satisficing Hypothesis, we follow Krosnick (1991) and
others (for example, Chang and Kronisk [2009]; Roberts et al. [2010]) by using
an indicator that taps a respondent’s propensity to give similar answers across
a range of questions. Non-differentiation refers to a respondent selecting the
same scale point to rate a number of items presented together in a battery, in
which the repetitive nature of the questions may lead to a lack of engagement
in the process of answering each question. For non-differentiation, we identi­
fied two batteries that are suitable for creating this measure: trust in five dif­
ferent institutions—from the police to the United Nations—and assessments
of trust, fairness, and helpfulness of people. Question wording is given in the
appendix. The indicator captures the proportion of answers that are the same
across each battery of questions, so that a value of 100 results if the respondent
gave the same answer to all questions on the first battery and the same answer
to all questions on the second battery. The same measure was used in Roberts
et al. (2010) to assess data quality in the ESS.
   In constructing these measures and applying them across a diverse set of
countries, the equivalence of meaning must be considered. Where there is

7. Political surveys are likely to pick up respondents high in political interest early in fieldwork,
meaning that those lower in political interest become a higher proportion of “accepts” later in the
fieldwork. If we were looking at election surveys, this would imply that political interest would
likely be negatively correlated with distance to the election. However, for the ESS, fieldwork dates
are not tied to an election period. To avoid any confounding effects, we control for the day of the
interview in the fieldwork period.


Surveys in Context                                                                             223


systematic error in survey measures due to country-specific differences in
responses to items, the underlying value on a scale might be the same but
the observed values may vary across countries due to tendencies to answer
questions in a particular way. When country-specific systematic bias exists in
measures, the scores will not be comparable across countries and are then said
to lack equivalence (Johnson 1998; van Deth 1998). The usual way to test and
adjust for measurement (in)equivalence is to use a latent variables approach
and fit a hierarchy of models in each country, imposing equality constraints on
intercepts and loadings to determine whether the assumption of equivalence
fits the data (see Davidov [2009], for example). However, previous research
using ESS data has demonstrated that the measures we are employing in this
paper to gauge reluctance and satisficing are mostly invariant (Kaminska,
McCutcheon, and Billiet 2010). Furthermore, Kaminska, McCutcheon, and
Billiet (2010) conclude that this limited lack of equivalence among respond­
ents on satisficing “may be theoretically meaningful and does not necessarily
imply a difference in measuring satisficing” (970).8
   We test the Conditioning Hypothesis by examining the moderating influ­
ence of a respondent’s level of political interest on the effects of proximity to
an election on survey cooperation and satisficing. Political interest has been
dichotomized from the four-point scale used in the survey to ease interpreta­
tion—a value of 1 indicates those who are very and quite interested in politics.
   Finally, the variable that runs through all our hypotheses is the timing of
the interview in the electoral cycle. For “days until” or “days since” an elec­
tion, we simply take the interview date for each respondent and calculate the
time before or since a national election or referendum. For example, surveys in
Slovenia began on October 6, 2008. The previous national election had been on
September 21,2008, while the next national election was held on June 6, 2010.
A respondent surveyed on October 24, 2008, was interviewed 33 days after the
election and 590 days before the next national election, whereas the last surveys
in this round in Slovenia took place on January 5, 2009, when respondents were
interviewed 106 days after the election, and 517 days until the next election. In
each model, we use days in increments of 100 to harmonize the coefficients.
    We do not include local or EU elections in our calculations, as these are sec­
ond-order elections, do not gain the same national media or party attention as
do national elections (Hix and Marsh 2011), and are therefore much less likely
to condition responses.9 In the appendix, we show the range of days from the

8. Furthermore, the latent variable approach described above is not suitable when the objective is
to test a structural relationship in as many countries as possible (see Stegmueller 2011). In other
words, we are interested in uncovering what is meaningful in cross-national variation in survey
cooperation and satisficing and need to optimize variation by testing a structural model in as large
a sample of countries as possible.
9. While we downplay the significance of these second-order election effects on survey responses,
we do note that there is variation in the salience of these elections at the national level (Hobolt,
Spoon, and Tilley 2009).


224                                                      Banducci and Stevens


election for each of the surveys. These data show considerable variation in the
proximity of fieldwork to elections, with seven surveys having a fieldwork
period within three months of an election, and 10 countries having a fieldwork
period that was more than a year away from an election. For the remaining
countries, the fieldwork period fell between three months and a year. The ESS
issues guidelines on fieldwork periods and recommends a period of one month
with consistent timing of the fieldwork across countries; however, the length
and timing of fieldwork have been allowed to vary (Koch et al. 2009).
   In examining the distribution of interviews per day (see appendix figure 1),
we also note a great deal of variation, showing that most interviews took place
within a year of an election or referendum, but there is a long tail. In most
studies, the electoral cycle is composed of the campaign period. Stevenson
and Vavreck (2000) operationalize “campaign length” into “short” and “long,”
with “short” meaning shorter than six weeks. Arceneaux (2008) focuses both
on the six-week threshold and also on three weeks. Gelman and King (1993)
suggest that voters are not paying attention any more than 200 days before an
election. Although US campaigns are notoriously long, the era of the “per­
manent campaign” has also spread to Europe, so that while official campaign
periods in countries such as the UK may only be 4-6 weeks, the reality is that
electioneering begins much earlier. However, we have argued that in addition
to a pre-election effect, there may also be a post-election effect on cooperation
on optimizing.
   Above, we note that the theories we draw on (campaign effects and election
ritual) do not specify the shape or duration of the effect. We therefore take into
account two considerations when constructing the appropriate measure of the
timing of the interview in the electoral cycle. First, we consider which trans­
formation of days to use. For example, a log transformation would suggest that
days closer to the election will have a stronger effect and that the size of the
effect of days diminishes as one gets further away from the election. On the
other hand, a quadratic term would suggest a direct relationship up to a certain
number of days, and that each additional day beyond that point does not influ­
ence the outcome or has the opposite (negative) effect, producing a curvilinear
effect. In either case of the logged or quadratic, the effect is initially strong
and then diminishes or disappears, whereas the linear transformation assumes
a specified unit increase in the outcome for each additional day in the electoral
cycle. It is also possible that the shape of the relationship between proxim­
ity and different outcomes varies. In our online supplementary analysis, we
assessed each transformation of days until the election, days since the election,
and the most proximate of the two against all outcomes. Based on an examina­
tion of both the main effects and the fit of the models, our analysis suggests
that a quadratic transformation is most appropriate. This supplementary analy­
sis also shows that the measures of days until the election and days since the
election provide the best fit. Separating out the effects of the electoral cycle
in this way also allows us leverage over issues such as whether electoral cycle


Surveys in Context                                                           225


effects are stronger before an election than after, and to examine separately a
campaign effect from an election ritual effect.
   For modeling cross-national data, our approach is to use mixed-effects
models to account for the multilevel structure of the data—individuals nested
within countries. For dichotomous measures (refusal and satisficing), we use a
logit function, while a general linear model is used for interviewer ratings. The
use of multilevel models does raise two considerations: first, which effects to
treat as fixed and which to treat as random, and second, whether particular
countries have greater influence on the results than others. Hausman tests were
performed to test for random versus fixed effects, and in additional supplemen­
tary analysis we provide tests of the influence of individual countries (online
supplementary analysis II). The analysis of the influence of specific countries
leads us to estimate models on a subset of countries, and in the results below,
we report where models have been estimated on a subsample of countries.
   In testing our hypotheses, we model each outcome indicator of survey
cooperation and satisficing as a function of days from the election and moti­
vation (political interest). In the models, which are estimated with random
intercepts at the country level, we also control for age, gender, and educa­
tion. Both age and education have been identified as indicators of ability to
interpret questions and thus may affect satisficing (Kaminska, McCutcheon,
and Billiet 2010). Because reluctance and satisficing may also be linked to
when the respondent completed the interview within the fieldwork period, we
also control for the number of days from the start of the fieldwork period that
the interview was completed. Therefore, any potential confounding effects of
reluctant respondents being picked up later in the survey will be accounted for.


Results
According to the cooperation and satisficing hypotheses, survey reluctance
and satisficing should increase as the interview date moves further away from
the election (i.e., the coefficient on the number of days from an election should
be positive). If motivation conditions satisficing such that satisficing declines
more among the politically interested, the coefficient on the interaction term
should also be positive. We estimate mixed models using random effects for
the constant and for our indicators of days from the election. We performed a
Hausman test examining whether allowing for a random slope for days was
not a significantly better fit over a random intercept model only across the
models. For timing of interview and refusal, the random intercept and slope
model was an improvement (chsq 75.27 with df9 for interview rating and
 111.41 df9 for refusal).
   Beginning with initial refusal in tables la and 1b, our expectation is that the
probability of initially refusing will decline closer to an election, while our
conditioning hypothesis examines whether this effect is greater for politically


226                                                                                                     Banducci and Stevens


                                                    *                                *         *
                                                                                                                           £ n. ■
                                                                                                                           o     o
                  <p                                                                               CO                                 •I 2
                  ;> o              oo r^- CN m    i—i CN o o CN o                             'sf oo                                  =    Q
                                              cn o cn O o                                      p r~-
                  § ^                         o d d d ° d o CN
 c                                                                                               1 NO
#o                2 £
                  « S3                                                                                                                 o     c/3
                  £ W                                                                                 CN                              fc E
 3                L-<
                  <L> >
                        >                NO ON CO (N o NO NO NO                                "sf cn
                                                                                                   Q                                   u ^
                                         CN o cn O o — o p
E                 Q,    O           o o
                                    o —’ d d d o d d o 00
                                                                                                   rcn NO
                                                                                                                                      -C o
                                                                                                                                      .2>x
 0>                                                                                                                                   X. <u
                                                                                                                                         m
                               oo   *   *     *     *                                *
 C                c     .2    ’S    *   *     *     *     *     *                    *         *
 3                .2 ’C                                                                                                    « B:
                                                                                                                         •o —H
 (Z)              *C/3 c
                   i— 3                                                                                                   C 1)
                                                                                                                          cS -O        £ ■S
                   © O              o Ov -'t (N ON , o r- ON oo
 03                >                                                                           ON oo                      ■>, o o            “
Q                  C U
                   o
                              cj
                              C/3
                                    o (N t3- O o o o o o 00                                    00                         £■ e •a Z
                                    d o d o o d d d d CN                                       o NO
T3                U s_
 G                      <2
                        V
                        *-H
 3                 c
                   C/33 X)
                  ,3 r-       ^4-   -sh y—1 m ON CO f -4 o CO in Tt
13                13 00        OJ
                               0    o Ov O CN CN o o o           p
                                                                                               ^t c n <n
                                                                                               p O 00                                  * -g
                                                                                                                                       >1    C3
a©     <D
       w                X     u     d d •^t d d d d d d NO
                                                               i
                                                                                                  ^
                                                                                               cn no  rOn
                                                                                                                          C/3 (U
                                                                                                                                •«


"ft                                                                                                                      ,o     O
       c                                                                                                                 ^      j3      5
             .2
                     xT
                  <D <D                                                                                                   C     <2
       C/3
       >>
       aj                                                                                                                 § a
4>
U      Q     1I I                   CN NO O n CN ON i o r- ON ON
                                    O CN cn O o o o o o O                                      NO >n
                                                                                                        (N
                                                                                                                          c3
c                                                                                                                               <L>   t: •§
-w
 cj
             ai^
             —
                                    d d d d o d d d o CN                                       o
                                                                                                                                      a |
 a
             c3 Jt3>0
             C/3 O W
                      -
                                       _ <n o in        ON O n t—
             •2 S       3           •— NO cn CN — < o o o — —-(
                                                                                               rin £ °
X            (U W
             X
                        o
                        u           d d CN d d d d d d CN                                      CN 5
                                                                                                  ? ov o                 .5     -5

>
©>
                                                                                                  fP O n '— '
                                                                                                                          I     *
>>                                                                                                                                     £ a
h                                                                                                                        I I          ° '5
                                                                                                                                      X
C/3
X5
3                                                                                                                        2<U £D
                                                                                                        '3U
                                    o cn ON i-H oo — o NO r** oo                               c n £>                     o     ^
                                                                                                                                 w
                                    o CN CN o o o o o o p                                      in o                       2

U                                   d d d d d d d d o                                          d d                        S <_3
                                                                                                                         •a
 3                X
#o
•C                      o           ^t CN cn    On    o NO cn                                                 On          « o3
 «                      U           o r- cn *—i T—1 o o o  p                                   t        5
                                                                                               •n qn, cn m
                                                                                                              (N          c o.
                                    d d CN d d o d d d                                                                    o S 3 x
E                                                                                              H oC ^ “                  ■o OJ ft ^
                                                                                                                         a> V
                                                                                                                         on —  2 ea
#S                                                                                                                       c3    c ^
                                                                                                                                      a o
 £                                                                                                                        3 £
                                                                                                                                      2 *
                                              o                                                                           C/3 X
                                              o                                                                           o '->
u
                                                                                                                                      03    C/3
                                                                                                                                      M   15
                                                                                                                                      L-l C/3
                                                                                                                          <D          "d    ,3
                                        C/3                                                                                     C/3   op 13
                                              o
o                                       2     o
                                                          <u
                                                              oo                                                          C
                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                                                                C/3                o
                                                          <D X
QJ                                      2     W                                                                                 2     -a    O
                                                                                                                          o              V
+->                                     c                                                                                       c
3                                              e          C X
                                                                 <Z)           3
                                                                               O
                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                         £
                                                                                                                          V
                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                         Cl,00
                                                                                                                                            C3
Q                                              o *o          T 3 73                                                       O B o
                                                  o             ©                         ,©                                C/3 JS o *
                                        O     d                                c5                                                C
                                                                                                                                 /3
                                              ">s M
                                                  73      oo    C3             o
                                                                                          P                              U  3
                                                                                                                            r t <U
                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                          X        c                     T
                                                    3           3     o                                                    X Co/3 o O
                                                                                                                           1.
                                        o     C      cr   X      cr
                                                                               T3    c    £
                                                                                                        u                 w
                                        CL                                 _0J W                                   C/3   — d ■H373 <u V
                                              3     cn    X
                                                                cn
                                                                      .2
                                                                                           O       c               CL    O _o        Vx cl
■o                                      jz;   C/3    w    C/3    w             (-■   03   T3       o               Z3
                                         oo         >.     u £                 oo    C     C   U        y          O     Z o C/3        *
                                              C3 c3 Cvl c3 oo 0)                     o    73                                (U >>
£                                       X     Q Q Q Q < X                     X      U    &             < z 6                    73 o
                                                                                                                           13 T 3 in


Surveys in Context                                                                         227


Table lb. Date of Interview in Election Cycle and Survey Reluctance:
Initial Refusal and Days since the Election
                                                     Days since the Election

                                               Refusals                       Refusals
                                             (High Effort)                  (Low Effort)

                                      coef         s.e.      sig     coef        s.e.       sig

Days into Fieldwork
  Interview Completed                 0.00         0.00              0.02        0.00       **

High Political Interest              -0.03         0.02      *      -0.15        0.33
Days until Next/from
  Last Election (100s)               -0.11         0.01      **
                                                                    -0.51        0.20       *

Days Squared                          0.02         0.00      **      0.04        0.01       *

Days x High Interest                  0.01         0.00              0.23        0.18
Days Squared x High Interest          0.00         0.00             -0.02        0.01
                                                             **
Age in 10 Years                       0.00         0.00              0.00        0.00
Female                                0.00         0.00              0.17        0.10
High Education                                               *
                                     -0.01         0.00              0.04        0.12
Constant                             -0.12         0.14                                     **
                                                                    -4.32        0.90
Random Effects
  Constant                            0.40         0.10      *       1.15       0.56
AIC/BIC                              3,369        3,425             3,014       3,092
N                                    17,682                         8,647
Groups                                 9                              4

    N ote .—Coefficient estimates are based on a mixed model with a random intercept and slope
for daysto account for clustering by country and a random slope for days to/from the election.
Hausman tests were performed comparing a fixed effects model (random intercept only) to model
including random effects for days. The Hausman test showed significant differences (chiqq=
75.27 with 9df).
    *p < .05; **p < .01


interested individuals. In table la, we show the results front models estimated
on four different samples of countries. The first column presents the results
estimated on the full sample of countries for which refusal data in ESS Round
4 are available (13 countries), the second column excludes the countries with
particularly high influence in column 1 (online supplementary analysis II),
and the final sets of columns, three and four, split the sample by high- and
low-effort refusal conversion countries. High-effort countries are those where
more than 55 percent of initial refusals were recontacted. The results sug­
gest that as the date of the interview is further away from the election, there
are more initial refusals in the sample of respondents (a positive coefficient).
This effect is consistent and significant across all subsamples, with the excep­
tion of low-effort countries, where the effect is not significant. The negative
quadratic term shows that this positive effect weakens as the election moves


228                                                        Banducci and Stevens


further away, and in fact the biggest effect is within 200 days of the election
(in figure la). In general, we see that the politically interested are less likely
to be initial refusals. This supports earlier research showing that motivated
respondents are more likely to cooperate with surveys. We also see that in
the full sample and in high-effort countries, the coefficient for the effect of
the interaction between days and political interest is significant. However, it
is difficult in a model with interaction terms to assess statistical significance
simply from viewing the coefficients and their standard errors alone, so we
construct graphs with predicted effects conditional on level of political interest
(Franzese and Kam 2009). Figure la shows the decline in initial refusals as the
interview day approaches the election, and there is a slightly lower probability
of refusal among the politically interested. Because we have controlled for any
fieldwork effect and that the difficult to reach and uninterested tend to be inter­
viewed later in the cycle, these results suggest that more politically interested
individuals could potentially be drawn into the sample as the election nears.
   In table 1b, we see that there is a significant effect of days since the election
and it is negative, suggesting that as the interview day moves further past the
election, initial refusals decline slightly, which is captured by the quadratic
terms and displayed in figure lb. Because we see little effect of “days since”


Figure 1. Days until an Election and Survey Reluctance: Initial Refusal by
Days and Political Interest (High Effort Countries). Lines depict the change
in predicted proportion (see table la) of initial refusals with 90 percent con­
fidence intervals (all other variables held constant at their means). The lines
demonstrate the overall effect of interaction between interest and days from the
election. This figure is based on estimates from the fixed-effects-only model.


Surveys in Context                                                                        229


the election on refusals, we estimate its impact only on low- and high-effort
countries separately. These effects as shown are not statistically significant;
therefore, there is little support for the election as a ritual when examining
survey reluctance with initial refusals.
   For interviewer ratings in table 2, we see that, for the motivated respondents,
interviewer ratings of reluctance decline as the election is more proximate to
the interview date. As illustrated in figure 2. the rating of reluctance declines as
one approaches the election; as hypothesized, these effects are stronger among
the political motivated. As with the refusals in figure 1, we see that reluctance
declines among the motivated. There is significant differentiation between inter­
ested and not interested respondents closest to the election, suggesting that the
pre-election period serves to increase cooperation among the motivated. The
results examining any ritual effect of the election show no significant effect of


Table 2. Timing of Interview in Electoral Cycle and Survey
Cooperation: Interviewer Rating of Reluctance
                                             Days until                 Days since an
                                            an Election                   Election

                                     coef           s.e.    sig    C oef           s.e.    sig

Day in Fieldwork Period          -0.03             0.00             0.01          0.00
High Political Interest          -4.30             0.30     **     -2.74          0.67     **

Days until Next/from Last
                                                                   -2.09                   **
  Election (100s)                    1.26          0.71                           0.90
Days Squared                     -   0.30          0.04             0.01          0.03     **

Days x High Interest                 0.38          0.10             0.01          0.23
Days Squared x
  High Interest                  -   0.02           0.01    **      0.01          0.02
Age in 10 Years                   0.11              0.00    **      0.04          0.01     **
Female                            0.29              0.12    *      -0.32          0.21     *

High Education                   -2.85              0.17    **     -0.77          0.29     **

Constant                         38.07              3.39    **     31.43          1.35     **

Random Effects
  Constant                        11.68            2.36     *        5.57        0.79      *

  Days                             2.20            0.41     *        0.00        0.00      *

AIC/BIC                         425433.5         425548.2         463424.2     463539.1
N                                50,963                            50,963
Groups                             26                                 26

    N ote .— Coefficient estimates are based on a mixed model with a random intercept and slope
for daysto account for clustering by country and a random slope for days to/from the election.
Hausman tests were performed comparing a fixed effects model (random intercept only) to model
including random effects for days. The Hausman test showed significant differences (chiqq=
75.27 with 9df).
    *p < .05; **p < .01


230                                                              Banducci and Stevens


Figure 2. Proximity to Election and Interviewer Rating of Reluctance:
Level of Reluctance by Days and Political Interest. Lines depict the change
in predicted proportion (see table 2) of don’t know and no answer responses
on political items with 90 percent confidence intervals (all other variables held
constant at their means). The lines demonstrate the overall effect of interaction
between interest and days from the election.

days since the election on reluctance (hence, no figure provided). Our supple­
mentary analysis (online supplementary analysis II) shows no country or set of
countries with unique influence, so we have not estimated the model on a sub­
sample of countries.
   We turn next to tests of the Satisficing Hypothesis. In table 3, we also find
evidence that satisficing is lower closer to the election. Respondents are more
likely to differentiate answers as the election nears. We also find support that
this is conditional upon motivation, as the interaction term is significant. As
before, we have graphed the conditional effects and show these in figure 3.
The pattern is consistent with our expectations that there is greater differentia­
tion between interested and uninterested respondents closer to the election in
satisficing. However, using a 90 percent confidence interval, these approach
traditional levels of statistical significance.10


Discussion and Conclusion
The value of cross-national surveys in examining how political and social
contexts shape attitudes and behavior has been demonstrated over the past


10. If we relaxed the confidence interval to 80 percent, as suggested by Western (1998), the
effects would be significant.


Surveys in Context                                                                             231


Table 3. Date of Interview in Election Cycle and Satisficing:
Non-Differentiation
                                               Days until                       Days since
                                               an election                      an election

                                        coef           s.e.    sig     coef             s.e.    sig

Day in fieldwork period              0.01             0.00     **
                                                                       0.00            0.00
High political interest             -3 .2 9           0.51     **
                                                                      -0 .1 2          0.08     *

Days until next/from
  last election (100s)              -0 .6 0           0.24     *
                                                                      -0 .0 4          0.04
Days squared                            0.04          0.02     *
                                                                       0.00            0.00
Days x High interest                    0.49          0.18     **      0.02            0.03
Days squared x High interest        -   0.04          0.01     **
                                                                       0.00            0.00
Age in 10 years                      0.45             0.06     **
                                                                       0.03            0.01
Female                              -0 .3 2           0.21             0.02            0.03
High education                      -0 .7 8           0.29     **
                                                                       0.10            0.04
Constant                            33.25             1.32     **                               **
                                                                        1.86           0.12
Random effects
  Constant                              0.37          0.05     **
                                                                       0.00            0.11
AIC/BIC                           463,416.9        463,522.9         40,763.6       40,860.9
N                                  50,963                            50,963
Groups                               26                                 26

    Note .—Coefficient estimates are based on a linear mixed-effects model with a random inter­
cept to account for clustering by country. Hausman tests were performed comparing a fixedeffects model with random effects for the intercept to a model with random effects for the slope
of days. These showed only marginal significant differences, so we have estimated a mixed linear
model with random intercept only to adjust for clustering by countries.
    *p < .05; **p < .01


20 years. Their vulnerabilities, such as measurement equivalence, have also
received considerable attention. Less attention has been paid to how varia­
tions in the timing of the fieldwork may affect data quality. We have inves­
tigated how the timing of the survey in the electoral cycle may affect survey
cooperation and satisficing. For some outcome indicators, we find support
for a context effect in that reluctance to cooperate and more limited support
that satisficing both decrease as the election approaches. For survey coop­
eration, we find that this effect is more pronounced among the politically
interested. We have found very little evidence to suggest that the election
itself acts to engage respondents in the ritual of politics. Below, we discuss
our results in the context of both cross-national survey research and cam­
paign effects.
   Survey methodology is focused on producing the highest-quality data
possible, and cross-national surveys introduce additional challenges to
producing data that are of comparable quality across a range of settings.


232                                                     Banducci and Stevens


Figure 3. Proximity to Election and Satisficing: Non-Differentiation by
Days and Political Interest. Lines depict the change in predicted proportion
(see table 3) of don’t know and no answer responses on political items with 90
percent confidence intervals (all other variables held constant at their means).
The lines demonstrate the overall effect of interaction between interest and
days from the election.


In addition to the contextual factors affecting survey response introduced
by Stoop et al. (2010), we introduce the timing of the survey in an elec­
toral cycle as another important contextual factor in cross-national sur­
vey research. Our analysis contributes to the debate on the relationship
between response rates and data quality. With declining response rates in
surveys, great effort is expended to increase response rates. However, the
greater the effort, the greater the risk of measurement error or poor-quality
answers (Lynn 2008). In other words, the reluctant respondents that are
captured through contacting and refusal conversion efforts are more likely
to introduce measurement error into their responses. If we understand the
politically uninterested as respondents more likely to introduce measure­
ment error, our analysis shows that the closer to an election, the more likely
those respondents who may give poor information are converted from an
initial refusal to a completed interview. Therefore, in cross-national surveys
that are not election studies, such as the regional “barometers” in Europe,
Africa, and Latin America, if the fieldwork or interview date is closer to
an election date, the quality of the data may be affected and thus not be
comparable to the quality of data collected in a different country that is at a
different point in the electoral cycle.


Surveys in Context                                                             233


   Our results show that political interest influences survey cooperation,
which follows on findings that motivation increases willingness to cooperate.
However, we also are able to show that the impact of motivation can depend
on the timing in the electoral cycle. The differentiation between motivated and
unmotivated is greatest in the period right before the election. In the figures dis­
played, this is in the 100 days before an election. In terms of initial refusals, we
suggest that the proportion of initial refusals declines as the election approaches
and is a higher proportion of a sample with proximity to an election, and that a
higher proportion of these conversions are drawn from individuals who are less
politically interested. Though we do not investigate in this analysis, this effect
may explain why there is not a significant increase in political interest as the
election nears.
   Our limited evidence linking satisficing and the fact that the timing of the
interview does not affect these outcomes is consistent with the findings of
Kaminska, McCutcheon, and Billiet (2010) in that they find that the relation­
ship between survey reluctance on satisficing is spurious, as both are driven by
cognitive ability. Our findings do show that motivation (i.e., political interest)
and cognitive ability (as measured by education) reduce satisficing, but that
these effects do not change according to the electoral cycle.
   For those interested in how campaigns affect respondent engagement in
surveys, our findings suggest that survey cooperation (and response rates),
not just satisficing (or optimizing), influence whether we detect campaign
effects. When fieldwork overlaps with campaigns or post-election periods, the
politically uninterested may be overrepresented. The implications for cam­
paign effects research should be further explored. While we do not compare
the learning and the optimizing hypotheses regarding campaign effects, our
analysis does suggest that optimizing is a factor in interviews conducted close
to elections for the motivated. When taken together with the supplementary
evidence that proximity to an election does not increase interest, we would
argue that our analysis suggests that optimizing can explain at least part of
what appear to be campaign effects.


234                                                    Banducci and Stevens


Appendix. Descriptive Statistics, Question Wording, and
Sampling Methods
Table A t. ESS Round 4— Descriptives on Main Indicators of Distance
from Election, Survey Reluctance, and Satisficing
                                                       Average
              Range of days                          interviewer
              most proximate   Sample   % Refusal      rating of        Non­
Country         to election     size    conversion    reluctance   differentiation

Belgium          447-549       1,760       0.07        31.92           29.49
Bulgaria          35-120       2,230        na         43.62           44.17
Switzerland        0-162       1,819       0.04        30.12           30.83
Cyprus           225-306       1,215        na         43.31           34.24
Czech
   Republic      226-259       2,018        na         41.77           31.40
Germany          239-395       2,751       0.13        29.64           27.83
D enmark         147-274       1,610        na         28.85           32.13
Estonia          622-736       1,661       0.00        36.27           29.37
Spain            182-356       2,576       0.08        37.60           29.77
Finland          551-689       2,195       0.02        30.12           26.21
France           526-656       2,073       0.07        30.87           27.13
United
   Kingdom       475-611       2,352       0.09        32.49           30.30
Greece            21-90        2,072        na         37.16           36.82
Hungary          356-414       1,544        na         37.97           33.74
Ireland            0-161       1,764       0.05        30.45           26.37
Israel             0-146       2,490        na         41.75           32.11
Netherlands      216-640       1,778       0.36        33.15           33.25
Norway           237-389       1,548       0.07        36.81           28.29
Poland           379-483       1,619       0.04        34.70           27.51
Portugal         203-340       2,367        na         37.13           34.79
Russia           251-403       2,512       0.02        51.05           37.44
Sweden           593-724       1,830        na         30.82           28.78
Slovenia          15-106       1,271        na         42.55           32.86
Slovakia          21^424       1,810        na         33.52           37.94
Turkey           258-564       2,416        na         46.03           44.52
U kraine         290-321       1,845        na         49.54           47.74


Surveys in Context                                                               235


Table A2. Description of Indicators
Indicator                                          Question/measurement
Days until election                      Count of days that the interview was com­
                                           pleted prior to the next national election
                                           (including parliamentary, presidential,
                                           and referenda)
Days since election                      Count of days that the interview was
                                           completed after the last national election
                                           (including parliamentary, presidential,
                                           and referenda)
Interview day in fieldwork period        Number of day interview completed in
                                           fieldwork period
Refusal                                  Calculated from the number of refusal
                                           conversion attempts made
Interviewer rating                       Clarification of questions
   (Average rating)                      Respondent reluctant to answer
                                         Respondent tried to answer questions to the
                                           best of ability
Non-differentiation                      Most people try to take advantage of you,
  (Proportion of time identical answer     or try to be fair
    was given across the battery of      Most of the time people helpful or mostly
    questions.)                            looking out for themselves
                                         Most people can be trusted or you can’t be
                                           too careful
                                         Trust in country’s parliament
                                         Trust in the legal system
                                         Trust in the police
                                         Trust in politicians
                                         Trust in the United Nations
Political interest                       How interested in politics (1 = Very and
                                           Quite interested; 0 = Hardly and Not at
                                           all)


236                                                       Banducci and Stevens


Description of Data & Sampling Methods
ESS4-European Social Survey Round 4 2008-2009

Round 4 of the ESS is funded via the European Commission’s 6th Framework
Programme, the European Science Foundation, and national funding bodies
in each country.
   The population includes all persons aged 15 and over resident within pri­
vate households, regardless of their nationality, citizenship, language, or
legal status, in the following participating countries: European Union coun­
tries— Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands. Poland,
Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, UK; non-European Union coun­
tries—Iceland, Norway, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine.
   The sampling method for the ESS involves strict random probability sam­
pling, a minimum target response rate of 70 percent, and rigorous translation
protocols. Appendix table 3 below gives details on the sampling design and
frame within each country.
   Sample sizes are given in appendix table 1. Standard errors of estimates
along with a description of the estimation techniques are given in the tables.
No weighting was used.

Question wording and response categories:

Using this card, generally speaking, would you say that most people can be
trusted, or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people? Please tell me
on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means you can’t be too careful and 10 means
that most people can be trusted.
0                         You can’t be too careful
1                         1
2                         2
3                         3
4                         4
5                         5
6                         6
7                         7
8                         8
9                         9
10                        Most people can be trusted


Using this card, do you think that most people would try to take advantage of
you if they got the chance, or would they try to be fair?

0                                             Most people try to take advantage
                                                  of me
1                                             1
2                                            2
3                                            3


Surveys in Context                                                                237


4                                              4
5                                              5
6                                              6
7                                              7
8                                              8
9                                              9
10                                             Most people try to be fair


W ould you say that m ost o f the tim e people try to be helpful or that they are
m ostly looking out for them selves?


0                                         People mostly look out for themselves
1                                         1
2                                         2
3                                         3
4                                         4
5                                         5
6                                         6
7                                         7
8                                         8
9                                         9
10                                        People mostly try to be helpful


U sing this card, please tell m e on a score o f 0 -1 0 how m uch you personally
trust each o f the institutions I read out. 0 m eans you do not trust an institution
at all, and 10 m eans you have com plete trust. First...?
... [country]?s parliam ent?
...the legal system ?
...the police?
...politicians?
...the U nited N ations?


0                                         No trust at all
2                                         2
3                                         3
4                                         4
5                                         5
6                                         6
7                                         7
8                                         8
9                                         9
10                                        Complete trust


 238                                                                                                    Banducci and Stevens


                                                                                                                                       68.44%
               &
               X                     OO      as                        X                        GO
               OO                    an                                                         OO
          o    OO
          a-                                 as                        00
          05   in                    r-      X                         r-~
          <D
          P4
                                                                                   >> ^
                                                        05             03          X   °
                                      a!)               <D
                                      CO                05             2     05
                                      3                 05              o
                                      O      ’>   a     O              X
                                     X       -a ’ £                     0)   b
                                                       X      O         05
                                     4-h      c   o    -a                    rd
                                      O    05 cd H            o         33
                                                              (N             C     G 2
               t-t                    S-h  <u 05 O                      O          O h Cd         S-H        t-H


                                                                                                                                       National Register
               <D                     E    on                  t-H     X     O
               co                     05
                                           o)
                                           a>
                                              a 2
                                              £ 13
                                                       2       <D             £             u £05            2
                                           H           t+-»   X         O    2              c
                                                                                            w ’5b           ’5b
                30                   ‘ 5b ■a  o         o      cd
                                                 X
                <D                     <u X
                                       Ui cd            <D    X         05   2 .                  a          a
                                                                              a.
               CtC
                                               o   '5
                                                        cd
                                                               o    05        3              05 QC          C*
               Id                    Id    05 c     03 x       cd 053
                                                                              05             3s- 2          2
                                       S3                     —
                a
                                       O  2    o
                                              _o
                                                    <D rd           rj  S3   X                D- c           c
          a    #o
                                           o
                                                    30 £       G h CU #o                         #o         .2
                                                               a
          £
          cd    cd                     cd X   2
                                               U
                                                    cd
                                                       X5          u   £     'B             u £              £
                                     z
          00   z                              hJ                       Z                         Z          Z


                             o
                            X
                             c
               3     <+-.
               O X3
               <D 2 Cu
               30  o
               cd _0) £
                      <U 2                                                                      <


                                                                                                                                       NA
               £
£                         >-»
                            X         <D
                                                                                                z
 a>        O
 GO       *a
                                      £
  g
 o        =5
                                      cd
                                     ■a                                X
                                                                        cd
 a
 GO       O                                  x
          X                                  ‘C
                            m    a    i:      30
          c
C*                          o    £ ^         X
          x                 i—   c3 *-<       05
-O                          30   05 05
  =                                   cd                               cd
 a                                   2
                                             5                        hJ

 go'                                 30
 a>
                                                                                                                        Single-stage equal probability systematic


                                     _c
 s
 as                                  ’a .
                                              —                                                 ^   On      J2   a)
 h
               Q_
                                     £                                                           cd —1
                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                            o03 ocO
Efa            £
               :d                                                      ac#T                                                                                                        <5 £
                                                                       £                        .>      <L> ^
 G                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                7d X <O
                                                                                                      +-i X
                                                                                                          t3
*. £58f                                                                                          c O
   a>                                X
                                                                       £o                          o « £
                                     p       X                                                              a - v-i
 Q                                            o                       X
                                                                       S3
                                                                       cd
                                                                                                            e -s
 a,
                                                                                                                          sample selection


 £        -a
                                                                                                            o 5
 G
          x
           o

          a3                                                           O
                                                                                                 £^ c x    X       ^


4 £                                                                    £
                                                                      X)                         |u gU
                                                                                                                          sample


                                     X       X
’■o                                   (U      <D                        D
 G
          a.
                                     id                               ’X                                    £
 G                                                                                              "a. JJ      a      uo
 O        £                                                                                      S •£ 05
                                                                                                      >>
C*                                                                                                         CO
c/3


               £                             a:
                                                                                                 ea
                                                                                                                                       Finland
s
          c
          3    £b                    J30                               £                         E
                                                                       Q-                        5
          O    2                     2                                 >»                        OJ
£         U    CQ                    03      u                        u                         Q          PJ


Surveys in Context                                                                                                                                                                       239


    Response rate


                                                                                                                                                  72.55%
                                                                                                      8*
                                             O n   r-               ON     in   on                               o
                                             ON    cs                      ir~i so                    'd-        cn r -
                                 ON
                                             TdO n
                                                                                          X           d
                                                   r-                                                 NO


                                                                                                                                in Portugal with more than
                                  cd
                                                          cd n
                                                                            ©                                    u
                                  cd
                                 T3
                                       ^
                                        u.                dj v-«/   ' a ,y c*             o     t/i              *4—«
                                  z,n 2 v-                          oc O Id                                        o
                                                                                                .£


                                                                                                                              National Register
                                 .2 ^ £            On «


                                                                                                                                10 households
                                                                     cd                   (5 ’o
    Sampling frame


                                  cd   uh    .52   £cd                      O GO          m    O n <z>
                                 x     °      oo                            O «
                                                                            <D Oo                 'o o            oo
                                  a,   £      2                                                    ©              <©
                                                                    ^ .2 d co
                                                                           E              t/2 © DC               OS
                                  c    3 ^                                                o >
                                  Q .O -                                                  X                             cd
                                                                    cd E    cd X              "© I d             cd
                                 W
                                 pq ^
                                     * o§          I      l l s             c iH          X X      C
                                                   8 3 8 u I3- S03 .23 ocl,
                                                                                          o «4-t _o              .2     °
                                 w C 'g                             cd                         o   cd            cd     2
                                 5           z                             z    c2                               Z _)
    Within household selection


                                             <                      <                                 <          <

                                                                                                                                                  NA
                                             z                      z                                 z          z


                                 cd                                        -3   cd
                                 X
                                 jq                x                       •5   x
                                 1                 'p                      .5 1
                                                   X175                    f! 2
                                                                           © ^
                                                                           rtl cd         cd
                                                   5                       Z hJ           d
                                  oo
                                 .2
                                                                                                                                                  Simple random sample of persons from


                                 "a*                                                                                    On
                                                                                                      On
                                  £                                                                   £                 £cd
                                                                    o      00             ^           g
                                                                    oo
                                                                           e d            x           p
                                                                                          x           o ,
                                                                                                       I i*  ss x■§i
                                                                                                                                                    registry of age 15 or over


                                                                                          x           •§
                                 X)
                                 o
                                                                                          o                a
                                                                    £                     o,           ^o pE xo >o1
                                                                                          ©           • -
                                                                                          W)          Cd    r-          O
                                                                                                            £ X         00
                                                                                                            O    O      cd
    Sampling method


                                                                                                            X X         tt
                                                                    x           ©                           C X          I
                                                                    c      0 -0           £                 cd
                                                                                                            u,
                                                                                                                 cd
                                                                                                                 u,
                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                        O
                                                                           o x            X      oo © © cz> _c
                                                                           oo +-*         o          oo O h O W
                                                                           2 T3 a c             .£   cd c    oo x
                                                                           C
                                                                           /5 o bO P             O n c/5 .G cd O
                                                                              X '«
                                                                         g D !tl •— '            £ © ’^5 to X
                                                                                      o          cd c
                                                                           B    3                C/5 o    II O M
                                                                           X    is                               > -fa
                                                                           H oo                       <          H co
                                                                                                                                                  Slovakia
    Country


                                             c                                                                          cd
                                  ©          cd     ©                      X              X           3          X      bx)
                                  o                 O                                      ©
                                  c           £     D               00
                                                                    e
                                                                           cd
                                                                                          X                       B p
                                                                                                                 -3 P
                                  cd         u      S               3           s—
                                                                                (75
                                                                                           ©           O         o c
                                 £           O     a                X                     z           z          Oh     Oh


240                                                                                                  Banducci and Stevens


      Response rate                o
                                       &
                                       Os X oo
                                              t£
                                                         X-    o           rr- r-H 00         CN    >n          t**;
                                   O s X (N O s          «n    X           <n
                                   IT) X X               X     X           «n


                                                         x
                                                         o                                 £   6
                                                                                       r   -. x
                                                                                  CO < N       ^
                                                                o c               ^   U,       -H
                                   J-l  3 J-H      U            S-H   <D          <U
                                         CO 1)                  « g 3 X              4>
                                                                                               X
      Sampling frame


                                       3<D ^CO CO Xg            co    w     CO X     x
                                   W) r j 5 0 OD 3             '5 b x      '5 b <    oo        '%
                                              <D <D                                             CO

                                   _ C _                       O«C “o c& x        CO co
                                                                                      O
                                                                                                O

                                    cd      cd cd              I d .S
                                                                      —3
                                                                          oCJ     co
                                                                                  o X
                                    c 3 c c                      3 X   £ to
                                                                       P O < 5 O
                                   .2  3CL 3o _Xo                O X
                                   cd    n    03   3            3 *           &t ii
                                   Z <£ Z Z                    Z


                                                         <D
                                                         X
      Within household selection


                                                         X

                                                         %
                                                         pi                 3
                                   < < <                 o                  X
                                                                            r“    CO
                                   Z Z Z                 X                  3     *i
                                                         o                  O «
                                                                            O X
                                                         X
                                                         u
                                                         £     X
                                                               X           3      £
                                                   'C     &
                                                    W)   £ x £
                                                         X9 &b to3
                                                   e>0                      W
                                                   3     3                  c)
                                             a-                 X           X
                                   x x                                      £
                                   £cd cd
                                       £ scd I                  3E
                                          3 >,

                                   X     — -3
                                         X                      X
                                   3     3  3                   3          X
                                   X     X                      X          o
                                   O     ^ 2
                                         O                      O
                                          ° a,
                                          o   <u
                                   <u «   a. w>
                                   W) bJj r “ 3
      Sampling method


                                   cd    cd
                                              cd   7
                                              «« <D
                                   O     O    3 <U
                                              3                  3
                                   S £ Xo x                     £
                                   X X  3 x
                                   <U D 3 <              <u     X<D
                                   X ’X >- XD            X      X
                                        >. X
                                        X 3
                                              3 is
                                              Hh go


                                                   X
                                                   C3                             X
                                     5                          <D
      Country


                                           3 T2
                                   '£<D    <L) oN         >>    3          X
                                     >
                                        _3 X
                                                         XL-    'cd        n 3*
                                     o £X < D
                                           £ '$           3     j§         '£ 2
                                   CO oo 00 00           H      53         D


Surveys in Context                                                                       241


                                         D a y s Until Election


Appendix Figure 1. Distribution of Interviews in Election Cycle in ESS
Round 4.


Supplementary Material

Supplementary data are freely available online at http://poq/oxfordjoumals.
org/.


References
Alvarez, R. Michael. 1998. Information and Elections. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Anderson, Christopher J.. Andre Blais, Shaun Bowler, Todd Donovan, and Ola Listhaug. 2005.
  Losers’ Consent: Elections and Democratic Legitimacy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arceneaux, Kevin. 2006. “Do Campaigns Help Voters Learn? A Cross-National Analysis." British
  Journal o f Political Science 36:159-73.
Ariely, Gal, and Eldad Davidov. 2012. “Assessment of Measurement Equivalence with CrossNational and Longitudinal Surveys in Political Science.” European Political Science
  11:363-77.
Best. Samuel, Kristin Johnson, and Brian Krueger. 2012. “Trends—Americans’ Interest and
  Enthusiasm in Election Campaigns.” Public Opinion Quarterly 76:783-814.
Bowler, Shaun, and Todd Donovan. 2002. “Democracy, Institutions, and Attitudes about Citizen
  Influence on Government.” British Journal o f Political Science 32:371-90.
Brehm, John. 1993. The Phantom Respondents. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Boomgaarden. Hajo G., and Claes H. de Vreese. 2007. “Dramatic Real-World Events and Public
  Opinion Dynamics: Media Coverage and Its Impact on Public Reactions to an Assassination.”
  International Journal o f Public Opinion Research 19:354-66.
Chaffee, Steven H„ Xinshu Zhao, and Glenn Leshner. 1994. “Political Knowledge and the
  Campaign Media of 1992.” Communication Research 21:305-24.
Chaiken, Shelly. 1980. “Heuristic versus Systematic Information Processing and the Use of
  Source versus Message Cues in Persuasion.” Journal o f Personality and Social Psychology
  39:752-66.


242                                                                Banducci and Stevens


Chang, Linchiat, and Jon A. Krosnick. 2009, “National Surveys via RDD Telephone Interviewing
   versus the Internet Comparing Sample Representativeness and Response Quality.” Public
   Opinion Quarterly 73:641-78.
Davidov, Eldad. 2009. “Measurement Equivalence of Nationalism and Constructive Patriotism in
   the ISSP: 34 Countries in a Comparative Perspective.” Political Analysis 17:64-82.
Enns, Peter, and Brian Richman. 2013. “Presidential Campaigns and the Fundamentals
   Reconsidered.” Journal o f Politics 75:803-20.
Erikson, Robert S., and Christopher Wlezien. 2012. The Timeline o f Presidential Elections: How
   Campaigns Do (and Do Not) Matter. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Franz, Michael, Paul Freedman, Kenneth Goldstein, and Travis Ridout. 2008. Campaign
   Advertising and American Democracy. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Franzese, Robert, and Cindy Kam. 2009. Modeling and Interpreting Interactive Hypotheses in
   Regression Analysis. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Gelman, Andrew, and Gary King. 1993. “Why Are American Presidential Election Campaign
   Polls So Variable When Votes Are So Predictable?” British Journal o f Political Science
   23:409-51.
Groves, Robert M., and Mick P. Couper. 1998. Nonresponse in Household Interview Surveys.
   New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Groves, Robert M., Stanley Presser, and Sarah Dipko. 2004. “The Role of Topic Interest in Survey
   Participation Decisions.” Public Opinion Quarterly 68:2-31.
Hetherington, Marc. 1996. “The Media’s Role in Forming Voters’ National Economic Evaluations
   in 1992.” American Journal o f Political Science 40:372-95.
Hix. Simon, and Michael Marsh. 2011. “Second-Order Effects Plus Pan-European Political
   Swings: An Analysis of European Parliament Elections across Time.” Electoral Studies 30:415.
Hobolt, Sara, Jae-Jae Spoon, and James Tilley. 2009. “A Vote against Europe? Explaining
   Defection at the 1999 and 2004 European Parliament Elections.” British Journal o f Political
   Science 39:93-115.
Johnson, Timothy J. 1998. “Approaches to Equivalence in Cross-Cultural and Cross-National
   Survey Research.” Zuma-Nachrichten Spezial. Available at http://www.gesis.org/fileadmin/
   upload/forschung/publikationen/zeitschriften/zuma_nachrichten_spezial/znspezial3.pdf.
Johnston, Richard, Andre Blais, Henry E. Brady, and Jean Crete. 1992. Letting the People Decide:
   Dynamics o f a Canadian Election. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Johnston. Richard, Michael Hagen, and Kathleen Hall Jamieson. 2004. The 2000 Presidential
   Election and the Foundations o f Party Politics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kaminska. Olena, Allan L. McCutcheon, and Jaak Billiet. 2010. “Satisficing among Reluctant
   Respondents in a Cross-National Context.” Public Opinion Quarterly 74:956-84.
Koch, Achim, Annelies G. Blom, Ineke Stoop, and Joost Kappelhof. 2009. “Data-Collection
   Quality Assurance in Cross-National Surveys: The Example of the ESS.” Methoden Daten
   Analysen 3:219—47.
Krosnick, Jon. 1991. “Response Strategies for Coping with the Cognitive Demands of Attitude
   Measures in Surveys.” Applied Cognitive Psychology 5:213-36.
--------- . 1999. “Survey Research.” Annual Review o f Psychology 50:537-67.
Krosnick, Jon A., Allyson L. Holbrook, Matthew K. Berent, Richard T. Carson, W.
   Michael Hanemann, Raymond J. Kopp, and Robert Cameron Mitchell. 2002. “The Impact of
    ‘No Opinion’ Response Options on Data Quality: Non-Attitude Reduction or an Invitation to
    Satisfice?” Public Opinion Quarterly 66:371-403.
Krosnick, Jon, Sowmya Narayan, and Tom W. Smith. 1996. “Satisficing in Surveys: Initial
   Evidence.” New Directions fo r Evaluation 70:29^14.
Lenz, Gabriel. 2009. “Learning and Opinion Change, Not Priming: Reconsidering the Priming
    Hypothesis.” American Journal o f Political Science 53:821-37.
Lenz, Gabriel S. 2012. “Follow the Leader? How Voters Respond to Politicians’ Policies and
   Performance.” .Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.


Surveys in Context                                                                        243


Lynn, Peter. 2008. “The Problem of Nonresponse.” Journal o f Statistics 42(2):255-70.
Mitchell. Dona-Gene. 2012. “It's about Time: The Lifespan of Information Effects in a Multiweek
  Campaign.” American Journal o f Political Science 56:298-311.
Parker, Suzanne. 1995. “Toward an Understanding of ‘Rally’ Effects: Public Opinion in the
  Persian Gulf War.” Public Opinion Quarterly 59:526-46.
Petty. Richard E., and John T. Cacioppo. 1986. The Elaboration Likelihood Model o f Persuasion.
  New York: Springer.
Rahn, Wendy M., John Brehm, and Neil Carlson. 1999. “National Elections as Institutions for
  Generating Social Capital.” In Civic Engagement in American Democracy, edited by Skocpol
  Theda and Morris P. Fiorina, 111-60. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Roberts, Caroline, Gillian Eva. Nick Allum, and Peter Lynn. 2010. “Data Quality in Telephone
  Surveys and the Effect of Questionnaire Length: A Cross-National Experiment.” ISER Working
  Paper Series, No. 2010-36.
Rudolph, Thomas J. 2005. “Group Attachment and the Reduction of Value-Driven Ambivalence.”
  Political Psychology 26:905-28.
Solvak, Mihkel. 2009. “Events and Reliability of Measures: The Effect of Elections on Measures
  of Interest in Politics.” International Journal o f Public Opinion 21:316-32.
Sorrentino, Richard M.. and Neil Vidmar. 1974. “Impact of Events: Short- vs. Long-Term Effects
  of a Crisis.” Public Opinion Quarterly 38:271-79.
Statham, Paul, and Howard Tumber. 2013. “Relating News Analysis and Public Opinion: Applying
  a Communications Method as a ‘Tool’ to Aid Interpretation of Survey Results.” Journalism
   14:737-53.
Stegmueller, Daniel. 2011. “Apples and Oranges? The Problem of Equivalence in Comparative
  Research.” Political Analysis 19:471-89.
Stevens, Daniel, Susan Banducci, Jeffrey Karp, and Jack Vowles. 2011. "Priming Time for Blair?
  Media Priming, Iraq, and Leadership Evaluations in Britain.” Electoral Studies 30:546-60.
Stevenson, Randolph, and Lynn Vavreck. 2000. “Does Campaign Length Matter? Testing for
  Cross-National Effects.” British Journal o f Political Science 30:217-35.
Stoop, Ineke, Jaak Billiet, Achim Koch, and Rory Fitzgerald. 2010. Improving Survey Response:
  Lessons Learned from the European Social Survey. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Tourangeau, Roger, and Kenneth Rasinski. 1988. “Cognitive Processes Underlying Context
  Effects in Measurement.” Psychological Bulletin 103:299-314.
Tourangeau, Roger, Lance Rips, and Kenneth Rasinski. 2000. The Psychology o f Survey
  Response. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Traugott, Michael, Ted Brader, Deborah Coral, Richard Curtin, David Featherman, Robert Groves,
  and Martha Hill. 2002. “How Americans Responded: A Study of Public Reactions to 9/11/01.”
  Political Science & Politics 35:511-16.
van Deth, Jan W. 1998. “Equivalence in Comparative Political Research.” Comparative Politics:
   The Problem o f Equivalence, edited by Jan W. van Deth. 1-19. London/New York: Routledge.
Voogt, R. J. J. 2004. Nonresponse Bias. Response Bias, and Stimulus Effects in Election
  Research. PhD thesis, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Western, Bruce. 1998. “Causal Heterogeneity in Comparative Research: A Bayesian Hierarchical
   Modeling Approach.” American Journal o f Political Science 42:1233-1259.
Zaller, John, and Stanley Feldman. 1992. “A Simple Theory of the Survey Response: Answering
  Questions versus Revealing Preferences.” American Journal o f Political Science 36:579-86.


Copyright of Public Opinion Quarterly is the property of Oxford University Press / USA and
its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.