Comparative Political Studies
                                                                        Volume 41 Number 7
                                                                           July 2008 899-920
                                                                   © 2008 Sage Publications

The Quantity and the                                             10.1177/0010414008315860
                                                                       http://cps.sagepub.com

Quality of Party Systems                                                              hosted at
                                                                    http://online.sagepub.com

Party System Polarization,
Its Measurement, and Its Consequences
Russell J. Dalton
University of California, Irvine


   Previous research claims that the number of parties affects the representation
   of social cleavages in voting behavior, election turnout, patterns of political
   conflict, and other party system effects. This article argues that research
   typically counts the quantity of parties and that often the more important
   property is the quality of party competition—the polarization of political
   parties within a party system. The author first discusses why polarization is
   important to study. Second, the author provides a new measurement of party
   system polarization based on voter perceptions of party positions in the
   Comparative Study of Electoral Systems, which includes more than 50
   separate elections from established and developing democracies. Third, the
   author compares party polarization and party fractionalization as influences
   on cleavage-based and ideological voting and as predictors of turnout levels.
   The finding is that party polarization is empirically more important in
   explaining these outcomes.

   Keywords:    party polarization; party fractionalization; turnout; voting


O     ne of the most widely examined properties of party systems is the
      counting of the number of parties. A large body of research examines
the merits of a two-party system versus a multiparty system (or a range of
parties) and links the number of parties to the representation of social cleavages in voting behavior, turnout in elections, representation, and levels of
political conflict (e.g., Blais & Dobrzynska, 1998; Kim, Powell, & Fording,
2006; Norris, 2004; Powell, 1982). Douglas Rae (1971) and others have
examined how the number of parties influences strategic voting and other
aspects of electoral behavior. At a systemic level, Lijphart (1999) includes
the number of parties as a prime indicator for the development of consociational democracy and links a range of effects to the consociational model.
900   Comparative Political Studies


The list of studies comparing the correlates of the number of parties is
extensive, touching many aspects of party and electoral behavior (Lijphart
& Grofman, 1991; Norris, 2004; Taagepera & Shugart, 1989).
    The simple premise of this article—but one often overlooked—is that
instead of counting the quantity of parties, a more important property of
party systems is often the quality of party competition. Many of the consequences attributed to the number of parties are actually linked to the degree
of polarization in a party system. Party system polarization reflects the
degree of ideological differentiation among political parties in a system.
Giovanni Sartori (1976) focused attention on this concept when he compared the consequences of centripetal and centrifugal party systems. In the
former, parties converge on the center to compete for the median voter; in
the latter, parties are more widely dispersed along the political continuum.
In other words, counting the number of parties was less important than
knowing how they were distributed ideologically. Similarly, many of
Anthony Downs’s (1957) theoretical arguments on the consequences of
party system competition were based on presumptions of how parties were
distributed along an ideological continuum.
    In historical terms, analysts claim that one of the factors contributing to
the collapse of democracy in the Weimar Republic was its heavily fractionalized party system. Similar claims are made about the breakdown of
Austrian democracy in the 1930s, the French Fourth Republic in the 1950s,
Chilean democracy in the 1970s, and the fragility of democracy in other
nations with a large and diverse party system (Powell, 1982; Sartori, 1976).
However, the problem facing Weimar, the French Fourth Republic, and
these other examples was not primarily the number of parties but the vast
ideological differences that separated parties and made governing problematic. The polarization of a party system is a property that can be independent of the number of parties, and I suspect that many of the effects
attributed to the fractionalization of party system are better understood as a
consequence of party system polarization.
    This article focuses on the meaning, measurement, and consequences of
polarization in contemporary democratic party systems. I begin by discussing the concept of party system polarization in the research literature
and why polarization is important to study. Second, I provide a new measurement of party system polarization based on public perceptions of parties from the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES). The CSES
has now conducted surveys in two waves and has polled citizens in more
than 50 elections. Most important, I examine two potential implications of
party system polarization and demonstrate how polarization has stronger


                                             Dalton / Party System Polarization   901


effects than party fractionalization. Finally, I discuss the implications of
these findings for contemporary party systems.


              The Literature on Party Polarization

   The concept of polarization has developed from two distinct approaches.
First, Anthony Downs (1957) introduced the concept of the spatial modeling of party systems, in which political parties (and voters) are aligned
along a Left and Right continuum. This provides a framework for party
competition. For instance, voters will typically select the party most proximate to their own position on this continuum. Thus, the relative movement
of voters and parties along this dimension alters outcomes from election to
election. Similarly, if the nearest party is far from the voter, he or she might
decide to abstain from voting. Or if two or more parties are equidistant, this
produces indifference that may also increases the likelihood of nonvoting
and makes voting predictions less certain.
   This spatial model is a powerful theoretical tool in studying elections
and voter behavior, party competition, and coalition formation (e.g.,
Adams, Merrill, & Grofman, 2005; Laver & Hunt, 1992; Laver &
Schofield, 1990). Moreover, embedded in Downs’s (1957) analyses was a
concern for the degree of polarization in a party system, although it was
often expressed in terms of the number of parties. For instance, Downs
assumed that two-party systems would converge to the center, whereas
multiparty systems would be spread along the Left and Right dimension.
Downs believed that the diversity of parties would also affect the correlates
of voting choice:

   Voters in multiparty systems, however, are given a wide range of ideological
   choice, with parties emphasizing rather than soft-pedaling their doctrinal
   differences. Hence regarding ideologies as a decisive factor in one’s voting
   decision is usually more rational in a multiparty system than in a two-party
   system. (p. 127)

The ideological spread of parties also should affect the voters’ proximity to
a preferred party and thus the likelihood of turning out to vote.
   A second approach is reflected in Giovanni Sartori’s (1976) influential
study of political parties (also see Evans, 2002). Sartori began with the
Downsian concept of an ideological space structuring party competition.
He specifically focused on the degree of polarization within a party system


902   Comparative Political Studies


and argued that there were both centripetal and centrifugal forces that influenced parties’ locations along the Left and Right scale. In some systems—
most often multiparty systems—these centrifugal forces produced a fleeing
from the center and a pattern of polarized pluralism (Sartori, 1976, pp. 131145). High levels of party system polarization can intensify ideological
debates, weaken the legitimacy of the regime, and destabilize the political
system. Sartori illustrated his theory with descriptive accounts of highly
polarized systems, such as the German Weimar system and the postwar
French and Italian systems. He contrasted polarized pluralism with the patterns of moderate pluralism or two-party systems, where centripetal forces
produced a different electoral dynamic and its consequences (Sartori, 1976,
pp. 173-192). Subsequent studies have adopted this framework to examine
how the number of parties—if not system polarization—influences the nature
of electoral choice, party coalitions, democratic representation, and political
stability (e.g., Kim et al., 2006; Lijphart, 1999; Norris, 2004; Powell, 1982).
   These spatial models thus converge on a common framework for studying party systems. Parties can be conceptualized as aligned along a single
policy or ideological continuum. Even if this is an oversimplification of
political reality, it provides a good first approximation of the nature of party
competition (Cox, 1990; Knutsen, 1998). In addition, the distribution of
parties along this continuum is an important characteristic of party systems.
Often, researchers have resorted to the shorthand of counting the number of
parties, because it was assumed that the number of parties reflected the
degree of polarization. However, the underlying theoretical logic implies
that the distribution of parties along the continuum is of equal or of greater
importance than the simple number of parties. The quantity of parties is
thus used as a surrogate for the distribution of parties. However, the degree
of party system polarization should more directly influence both the patterns of voter behavior as well as the broad characteristics of the political
system. I examine this framework in this research.


             Measuring Party System Characteristics

   Scholars have long emphasized the number of parties as an important
characteristic of party system. Empirical researchers have adopted two different methods to count the number of parties to give weight to the relative
size of parties and not just their absolute numbers. Party fractionalization
(the Herfindahl index) is calculated from statistics on the relative size of
parties:


                                               Dalton / Party System Polarization   903


   Herfindahl = ∑(party seat share in legislaturei)2,

where i represents individual parties. The Herfindahl index can be interpreted as the probability that two deputies picked at random from among
the legislative parties will be of different parties, with higher values indicating a less fractionalized party system. This measure or its variants have
been widely used in empirical research on party systems (e.g., Klingemann,
2005; Rae, 1971; Sigelman & Yough, 1978; Taylor & Herman, 1971).
An alternative statistic is the Laakso and Taagepera (1979) measure of the
effective number of parties (also Taagepera & Shugart, 1989). The
Laasko–Taagepera index is simply the inverse of the Herfindahl index,
which counts the number of parties weighted by size to discount the
relevance of small parties.1 In other words, different studies comparing
the number of parties in a party system use either of these two indices,
but these two measures are essentially interchangeable. For instance, in
the elections included in the CSES database, the Herfindahl and
Laasko–Taagepera scores are correlated at r = .92 (N = 62). Furthermore,
these statistics on the number of parties are readily calculated for each
election and each legislature from publicly reported data.
    Party system polarization is a more difficult concept to measure. The
logic of party system polarization implies that it should reflect the distribution of parties along an ideological dimension. Following the lead of
Downs (1957), I conceptualize parties as aligned along a single ideological dimension. A few large parties near the center of the continuum
would reflect a centrist party system in which centripetal forces encourage parties to move toward the center. Conversely, a system with a
number of large parties at the political extremes is a highly polarized
system in which centrifugal forces are pressuring parties to move to the
extremes.
    Until recently, however, it was difficult to compare party systems on
their degree of polarization, because this required measuring the ideological position of parties as well as their vote shares. Typically, researchers
estimated polarization from indirect indicators, such as the number of parties in an electoral system, the size of extremist parties, or the vote share
for governing parties (Pennings, 1998; Powell, 1982). Sartori (1976)
attempted to estimate polarization by categorizing parties as Left, Right,
or Center; Sigelman and Yough (1978) used a 4-category grouping of party
families available from a U.S. State Department report; Gross and
Sigelman (1984) used 10-party family categories (e.g., communist, socialist, centrist, fascist) coded by the Britannica Yearbook and assigned them
interval values. These methods provide broad approximations of the actual


904     Comparative Political Studies


ideological position of parties but treat all parties of a family as identical
and differences between families as equal interval differences. Another
option is the use of party manifestos to estimate parties’ Left and Right positions (Budge, Robertson, & Hearl, 1987; Caul & Gray, 2000; Klingemann,
2005). However, the comparative manifesto project focused on the salience
of issues rather than party positions, and thus there is debate about the
validity of this methodology (Gabel & Huber, 2000; Harmel, Tan, &
Janda, 1995; Laver & Garry, 2000).
   I therefore turn to another source to directly measure the distribution of
parties: the perceptions of the electorate in the nation. The CSES is a cooperative international project that asks a common questionnaire in the
national election studies of many contemporary democracies.2 The first
module of the CSES included 36 nations, and the current release of the second module includes 29 nations. Thus, the CSES offers an unparalleled
resource to compare partisan images across nations and to track changes in
perceptions across two waves of surveys.
   Following Downs (1957) and previous researchers, I begin by assuming
that party politics is structured along a Left and Right dimension. The use of
a Left and Right scale does not imply that citizens possess a sophisticated
conceptual framework or theoretical understanding of liberal–conservative
philosophy. I simply expect that positions on this scale summarize the
issues and cleavages that structure political competition in a nation. Ronald
Inglehart (1990), for instance, found that citizens in most nations can locate
themselves on the Left–Right scale and described the scale as representing
“whatever major conflicts are present in the political system” (p. 273; also
see Dalton, 2006; Huber & Inglehart, 1995; Knutsen, 1999). The meaning
of this dimension can, and indeed likely does, vary across nations. In keeping with Downs’s logic, these labels provide reference points that help citizens interpret and evaluate political parties and other political actors and
policies. Thus, the Left–Right dimension provides a metric for the crossnational comparisons.
   The CSES asks respondents to position themselves along a Left–Right
scale using the following question:3

      In politics people sometimes talk of Left and Right. Where would you place
      yourself on a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 means the Left and 10 means the Right?

After placing themselves on the Left–Right scale, the survey asked respondents to position the parties in their nation; up to six parties were included.
These citizen placements of the parties provide the basis for measuring
polarization for the party system as a whole.


                                                                                     Dalton / Party System Polarization                           905


                               Figure 1
         Citizen Placement of Parties on the Left–Right Scale
                                                                     Party
                                              New D BQ               Mean Lib                 Con

         Canada
         2004
             |---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|----------------|---------------|
            1               2                3               4               5               6               7               8                9


                                                                          Party
                          IU                   PSOE                    CU Mean                                              PP

         Spain
         2004
             |---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|----------------|---------------|
            1               2                3               4               5               6               7               8                9


                                                                           Party               Soc Ch
                                               UnL LibDem             Slov Mean             PP Dem Dem

         Slovenia
         1996
             |---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|----------------|---------------|
            1               2                3               4               5               6               7               8                9


             ( 0.77)                                              Party
              Com                   Soc Dem                       Mean                CDU                FU                 Civ Dem

         Czech
         2002
             |---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|----------------|---------------|
            1               2                3               4               5               6               7               8                9


    Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of parties in four nations as examples
of the patterns in this study. The first two panels in the figure present two
nations—Canada and Spain—both with a relatively small number of parties. The size of the arrow in the figure approximates the vote share for the
party in the immediately previous election. In the Canadian 2004 election,
for instance, the Liberals (mean placement = 5.11) and the Conservatives
(mean = 6.22) are located near the center of the scale. The New Democrats
and Bloc Quebeqois are further to the Left. However, all the parties are relatively near the weighted mean of the party distribution (mean = 4.99).
    Spain presents a contrasting case. The number of major parties is comparable to Canada, but the Spanish parties were much more polarized in
2004. Spaniards located the two major parties—the Socialist party (PSOE)
and the People’s party (PP)—near the poles of the Left–Right scale, and the
PSOE is even outflanked on the Left by the United Left (Izquierda Unida).
Indeed, this was a highly polarized election initially because of sharp


906     Comparative Political Studies


disagreements between the PSOE and PP over economic policy and the war
in Iraq, then punctuated by the Madrid terrorist bombing on the eve of the
election. In short, even though the numbers of parties is roughly equivalent
in these two party systems, polarization varies substantially.
    The last two nations in Figure 1 show a similar pattern for two new
democracies in Eastern Europe, both with a larger number of political parties. In the Slovenian election of 1996, the public positioned all the major
parties within a modest range along the Left–Right scale. In contrast, the
Czech party system in 2002 had approximately the same effective number
of parties, but the parties were much more widely dispersed along the
Left–Right scale. The Communists were positioned at 0.77, and the Civic
Democrats at 8.24. These parties represent more than 40% of the electorate,
yet they are positioned near the ideological extremes. The other Czech parties are also widely dispersed between these two poles.
    Figure 1 illustrates two points. First, the measurement of polarization
can be relatively independent of the number of parties because even party
systems with relatively similar numbers of parties vary widely in the
Left–Right distribution of these parties. Second, my conceptual measure of
party polarization should include two elements: (a) the relatively position
of each party along the Left–Right scale and (b) the party’s position
weighted by party size (because a large party at the extreme would signify
greater polarization than a splinter party in the same position).
    I developed an index to measure the distribution of parties along the
Left–Right scale.4 The Polarization index is measured as the following:

      PI = SQRT{∑(party vote sharei)*([party L/R scorei – party system
      average L/R score]/5)2},

where i represents individual parties. This index is comparable to a measure of the standard deviation of a distribution and is similar to the statistics used by other scholars.5 It has a value of 0 when all parties occupy the
same position on the Left–Right scale and 10 when all the parties are split
between the two extremes of the scale. This statistic calculates what is
apparent from the party locations in Figure 1. For instance, the Canadian
party system in 2004 has a Polarization index of 2.06, whereas the Spanish
system has an index of 4.33. Similarly, the Slovenia party system has an
index of 2.15, whereas the Czech polarization score is more than twice as
large at 5.43.
   Table 1 presents the Polarization index for all the democracies in the two
modules of the CSES. There is considerable variability in the polarization


                                                 Dalton / Party System Polarization     907


                                    Table 1
                      Party Polarization Index by Nation
Nation                           Time 1                  Time 2                   Change

Australia                         2.04                     1.96                       –.08
Belgium                           2.46                      —
Brazil                            —                        2.00
Bulgaria                          —                        4.37
Canada                            1.83                     2.06                        .23
Czech Republic                    5.44                     5.43                       –.01
Denmark                           3.84                     3.57                        .27
Finland                           —                        2.85
France                            —                        3.29
Germany                           2.51                     2.70                        .29
Hungary                           3.40                     5.85                       2.45
Iceland                           4.49                     4.08                       –.41
Ireland                           —                        2.20
Israel                            3.99                     3.87                       –.12
Japan                             3.30                     3.30                        .00
Korea (S.)                        0.70                     3.55                       2.85
Lithuania                         3.41                     —
Mexico                            1.29                     2.10                        .81
Netherlands                       2.89                     3.64                        .75
New Zealand                       3.81                     3.35                       –.46
Norway                            3.42                     3.75                        .27
Peru                              0.84                     —
Philippines                       1.33                     0.46                       –.87
Poland                            5.18                     4.92                       –.26
Portugal                          3.62                     3.44                       –.12
Romania                           2.13                      —
Russia                            4.01                      —
Slovenia                          2.15                      —
Spain                             4.02                     4.33                     .29
Sweden                            5.19                     4.07                   –1.08
Switzerland                       3.19                     4.01                     .82
Taiwan                            1.18                     1.14                    –.04
United Kingdom                    2.82                     2.37                    –.45
United States                     —                        2.43
Total N                          29                       28

Source: Comparative Study of Electoral Systems; available from www.cses.org.


of contemporary party systems. In a few instances, polarization drops
below 1.0. For instance, in the 2000 South Korean election, the democratic
reformer Kim Dae Jung switched parties to run with the conservative
Millennium Democratic Party to win the election; this dramatically reduced


908   Comparative Political Studies


party polarization in this election (which rebounded in the 2004 election).
In the case of the Philippines and Peru, the low Polarization index implies
that these party systems are not offering significantly different choices in
terms of the public’s perceptions. At the other extreme, polarization is substantially higher in a range of other party systems (e.g., Sweden and Iceland
among established democracies and Poland and the Czech Republic among
new democracies). These are nations where the public sees party choices
that nearly span the entire Left–Right continuum. In addition, although
there is variability over time, most party systems have fairly stable levels of
party polarization, with most ranging within +/–.25 between the two modules of the CSES.
    In broad terms, it seems logical to assume that party systems with a
large number of parties also tend to be more polarized. However, correlating polarization with the Herfindahl index of party fractionalization
shows that these two party systems characteristics are unrelated (r =
.067, N = 33).6 The examples of Figure 1 are thus typical in showing how
polarization can vary nearly independent of the number of parties.
Reaffirming this pattern, Gross and Sigelman (1984) similarly found that
party system fractionalization and polarization were essentially orthogonal characteristics of the 46 party systems they compared in the late
1970s.
    The structure of the electoral system, measured by the district magnitude,
has a stronger relationship with polarization (r = .338).7 However, it is also
apparent from Table 1 that party system polarization can vary considerably
between the two CSES modules even when the electoral system is constant.
We also might assume that fractionalization is greater in new party systems
where party alignments are still forming and parties are less institutionalized.
In fact, polarization is slightly greater in an established party system
(r = .087), although this is also an insignificant correlation.
    In addition, Downs’s analyses presume that the polarization of a party
system reflects the dispersion of citizens along the ideological dimension:
In systems with voters compacted together, the parties will converge toward
the median, whereas in systems with voters dispersed along the continuum,
the parties will spread out to reflect this distribution. In fact, this is not
empirically correct. The dispersion of citizens along the Left–Right scale
(measured by the standard deviation of Left–Right self-placement) is
almost unrelated to the party system Polarization index (r = .144, N = 28;
CSES Module I). This is partially because most publics follow a singlepeaked distribution with only modest differences in their standard deviation
and because party polarization seems to vary independently of these patterns.8


                                            Dalton / Party System Polarization   909


    Rather than such institutional structures or societal characteristics, party
polarization often reflects the internal dynamics of electoral competition in
a nation. Parties and their leaders make strategic or ideological choices
when they begin a campaign, and other parties respond to these choices. If
one thinks of the ebbs and flows of party positions across campaigns in a
nation (e.g., the Nixon–McGovern campaign of 1972 versus Bush–Clinton
in 1992), this illustrates how parties’ campaign choices vary the level of
polarization. The polarization statistic is capturing this process and displaying
the nature of party competition in each system, which is also my objective.
    Certainly there are limitations to these measures of polarization, as there
are to measures from other data sources. I am assuming that voters can
meaningfully place political parties along a Left–Right continuum. Some
might question whether a single dimension is sufficient; but this often
yields a good approximation of the basic cleavages in a society (e.g.,
Inglehart, 1990; Knutsen, 1999). In addition, research often questions the
sophistication of mass publics. However, cumulating estimates over all voters should generate a reliable measure of party positions. Moreover, even if
one argues that the placement of a party is incorrect, this is still the placement that the public perceives and this is what should influence their behavior. To the electorate, their perceptions are reality. Thus, there is a strong
internal logic to using citizen estimates of party positions to predict citizen
political behavior.


                   The Correlates of Polarization

   A considerable body of research maintains that the degree of polarization in a party system—often measured by fractionalization—has important
consequences. A highly polarized system presumably produces clearer
party choices, stimulates participation, affects representation, and has more
intense partisan competition. Thus, the ideological gap between winners
and losers is greater and the policy implications of government control are
more substantial. Conversely, a centrist party system should reflect greater
consensus within the electoral process—at least in Left–Right terms—and
less interparty conflict and less political responsiveness.
   To illustrate the value of measuring party system polarization, I examine
two areas of party system differences that are widely discussed in the literature. First, I analyze how polarization and fractionalization might be
related to the strength of voter–party relationships. Second, I examine how
these two party system characteristics affect turnout in elections.


910   Comparative Political Studies


The Polarization of Voter Preferences
    One hypothesized effect of party polarization is on the correlates of party
preferences. If parties offer limited choices to voters, then it is not likely that
the voter blocs will differ sharply across parties. Downs expressed this idea
in terms of the number of parties, although his logic is clearly based on party
polarization: “Voters in multiparty systems are more likely to be swayed by
doctrinal considerations—matters of ideology and policy—than are voters
in two party systems” (1957). Bing Powell (1982) discussed this hypothesis
in terms of class voting. He maintained that when parties offer distinct ideological choices, then it is more likely that social class groups could identify
and support a party that was more representative of their positions. When
tweedledum is running against tweedledee, then there is little to choose
between them. Pippa Norris (2004) similarly found that the overall level of
social cleavage voting was higher in proportional representation systems
than in majoritarian systems with fewer parties.
    However, the focus on class voting is merely a shorthand for a broader
hypothesis: Diverse party choice should generally strengthen the polarization of voters. If parties are distinctive in their issue positions, then issues
can have greater weight, all else being equal (such as when the issues are
of equal relevance across nations). I might debate the causal direction of
this relationship, but the present analyses simply focus on the strength of
this relationship.
    I can test this hypothesis in two ways with the CSES surveys. First, I calculated the relationship between social class and party support across
nations. I expect that class issues are generally relevant in contemporary
electoral systems and that the level of class voting will be stronger in more
polarized systems. However, I also know that the institutional history of a
party system and the nature of class–interest group alignments affect the
level of class voting (Lipset & Rokkan, 1967). Therefore, as a second step,
I generalize this test to examine variations in the correlation of Left–Right
self-placement with party choice. Most voters in most party systems can
locate themselves along the Left–Right scale. As noted earlier, I do not presume that they have a deep understanding of the Left–Right scale in liberal
and conservative ideological terms. Rather, Left–Right positions summarize positions on the political issues of relevance in a nation (Fuchs &
Klingemann, 1989; Inglehart, 1990; Knutsen, 1999). In some nations, this
may tap class conflicts; in other nations, cultural or social issues are more
important. Thus, Left–Right position acts a summary of the issues most relevant to the respective public in each nation.


                                                                                   Dalton / Party System Polarization            911


                                                             Figure 2
                                       The Impact of Left–Right Attitudes on Vote Preferences
                                                as a Function of Party Polarization

                                       0.45


                                        0.4                                                    Iceland
                                                                                      Sweden                      Czech
    Left—Right Correlation With Vote


                                                                USA             Denmark         Bulgaria
                                       0.35
                                                                           Korea Norway
                                                                                                    Spain
                                                                       France              Israel                  Hungary
                                        0.3                                     Portugal
                                                               UK                                   Poland
                                                                      Finland
                                                  Canada                          Netherlands
                                       0.25                                       New Zealand
                                                  Australia Ireland       Japan


                                        0.2                         Germany

                                              Taiwan
                                       0.15            Brazil

                                                        Mexico                                                   r = .633
                                        0.1
                                              1            2              3                4                 5               6
                                                                        Polarization Index


Source: Comprative Study of Electoral Systems, Module II and the Polarization index in Table
1; available from www.cses.org.

   To demonstrate the value of the Polarization index, I compare the level
of class voting as a function of the polarization and fractionalization of the
party system. I examined the 26 nations in the second module of the CSES
that asked the same question on party preferences and coded social class
into the same categories.9 My dependent variable is the correlation
(Cramer’s V) between social class and party preference.
   The strength of class voting is related to the nature of the party system.
Using the Fractionalization index, there is a .32 correlation between fractionalization and the strength of the class voting correlation. That is, class
voting is stronger in more fractionalized party systems. However, the
Polarization index shows a stronger tendency for the strength of class voting
to be higher in more polarized party systems (r = .47).


912   Comparative Political Studies


    An even more robust test is the correlation of Left–Right self-placement
with party preference, because this is a more encompassing measure than
the single cleavage of class voting. I believe the Left–Right position is more
comparable across nations in examining party system effects because class
voting may reflect the structure of interest groups or the composition of the
labor force. Figure 2 presents the relationship between Left–Right attitudes
and party preferences as a function of party system polarization. There is an
impressively strong (r = .63) relationship between the party polarization
and the correlation between Left–Right attitudes and party choice. For
instance, returning to the examples from Figure 1, Canada in 2004 has a
low level of party polarization on the x-axis (2.06) and the correlation
between Left–Right attitudes and vote is only .27 on the y-axis; polarization
is higher is Spain and the correlation is stronger (r = .34); and even higher
polarization in the Czech Republic yields an even stronger correlation (r = .36).
    The results of Figure 2 may seem unsurprising and inevitable: With
more electoral choice, voters can more clearly translate their Left–Right
orientations into a party preference. Indeed, this is the theoretical logic I am
testing. But the important factor is not the number of party choices, which
is what previous research has primarily tested, but the ideological diversity
of choice as measured by the Polarization index. I can demonstrate this
point by repeating the analysis using the Fractionalization index instead of
polarization. Figure 3 shows that party system fractionalization is unrelated
to the strength of the Left–Right relationship (r = –.020).10 As I demonstrated
above, party systems can vary in the number of parties almost independently of the polarization among the parties. Thus, the correlation between
Left–Right attitudes and party preferences can be stronger in a system with
fewer parties but more polarization (e.g., Spain, r = .34) than in a system
with many parties but less polarization (e.g., Finland, r = .29)
    A unique aspect of the CSES study is that I can replicate these analyses
with the nations from the Module I data set. I again find that the impact of
Left–Right attitudes on party preferences is strongly conditioned by the
level of polarization in the party system (r = .69, N = 27).11 At the same
time, party system fractionalization has little relationship to the strength of
the Left–Right relationship with party preference (r = .16).


The Party System and Voting Turnout
   Another commonly cited consequence of the fractionalization and polarization of party systems is turnout in elections. The logic is quite clear. With
few choices, voters have limited opportunities to find a party that represents


                                                                                  Dalton / Party System Polarization   913


                                                            Figure 3
                                      The Impact of Left–Right Attitudes on Vote Preferences
                                            as a Function of Party Fractionalization

                                     0.45


                                      0.4                                      Iceland
                                                                                   Denmark
  Left—Right Correlation With Vote


                                              USA           Bulgaria
                                                                                          Sweden
                                     0.35                                       Czech
                                                            Korea
                                                  Spain                          Norway
                                                                Portugal                              Israel
                                                                                 France
                                      0.3                             Poland
                                                                               HungaryFinland
                                                    UK       Canada                  Netherlands
                                                                            New Zealand
                                     0.25         Japan               Ireland
                                                            Australia

                                                                             Germany
                                      0.2
                                                           Taiwan
                                                                                                   Brazil
                                     0.15
                                                                    Mexico                           r = −.020


                                      0.1
                                            0.5           0.6            0.7         0.8               0.9             1
                                                                       Fragmentation Index


Source: Comparative Study of Electoral Systems, Module II and Fragmentation index;
available from www.cses.org.


their views and thus may choose to abstain from voting. However, as the
number of choices increases, voters should more easily find a party they
agree with, which justifies the effort to cast a ballot. Thus, a host of crossnational empirical studies have demonstrated that party system fractionalization, along with other institutional characteristics, is related to aggregate
levels of election turnout (Blais & Dobrzynska, 1998; Jackman & Miller,
1995; Norris, 2004; Powell, 1982).
   This pattern reflects Downs’s (1957) logic that abstention increases
when the distance between a voter and the nearest party on the political
continuum also increases. However, if the underlying process is based on
ideological distances, then the number of parties may be a poor measure of


914   Comparative Political Studies


proximity. As seen above, there are multiparty systems with parties compacted together and thus offering limited choices, whereas systems with
fewer parties have these parties dispersed along the Left–Right scale. In
other words, even when studies examine the number of parties, the dispersion of parties along the Left–Right scale should be a more accurate measure of the hypothesized causal process.
    Although the logic of party system polarization effects seems straightforward, the estimation of effects is complicated by the other institutional
and contextual factors that influence aggregate turnout levels. For instance,
Pippa Norris’s (2004) recent analysis of aggregate turnout used seven different institutional variables. In addition, prior research identifies other predictors that one might include in a comprehensive model (e.g., registration
requirements or when elections are held).
    It is not possible with the small number of nations in the CSES to have
such an extensive model, and so I focus on a subset of key predictors. First,
to have a comparable measure of turnout, I measure turnout percentages as a
function of the total voting age public that partially adjusts for the differences
in voter registration requirements across nations.12 Then I entered several predictors into three regression models. I started with the two measures of party
system characteristics: polarization in Model I, fractionalization in Model II,
and then both characteristics in Model III. The models also include two other
institutional factors: the existence of compulsory voting requirements and
whether the turnout was for a sole parliamentary election or for an executive
or executive–parliamentary election. These two variables were among the
strongest institutional predictors in Norris’s (2004) models.13
    Table 2 presents these three regression models. In the first model, the
polarization of a party system has a distinct positive impact on turnout (β =
.289). These effects are comparable to those of a compulsory voting system, which has a slightly stronger effect (β = .384). By comparison, the second model exchanges party system fractionalization for polarization. Using
the standardized coefficients as a guide, fractionalization has approximately half the impact of the polarization variable. A third model includes
both party system measures. Again, party polarization emerges as substantially stronger than party fractionalization; the results are largely the same
as Model I, and the explained variance is quite similar. Only the coefficients
for compulsory voter in Models I and III are statistically significant at the
.05 level for a one-tailed test, largely because of the small number of
nations I am analyzing. However, party system polarization approaches significance even with this small N, and the Fractionalization index is far from


                                                     Dalton / Party System Polarization      915


                                    Table 2
                   The Predictors of Voting Turnout (N = 29)
                                Model I                  Model II                Model III

Predictors                b       SE       β        b      SE        β      b       SE       β

Polarization             2.89    2.09     .289    —        —         —    2.61     2.31    .264
Fractionalization         —       —        —     16.76    22.14     .149 6.38     23.86    .057
Compulsory voting       15.85    8.12     .384   10.82     7.97     .262 15.06     8.77    .365
Simultaneous             3.20    5.45     .118    1.12     5.25     .041 3.26      5.56    .120
   executive election
Constant                59.96    7.79      —     56.98    15.92     —    55.27    15.91      —
R2                                .385                      .325                    .389

Note: Table entries for each model are unstandardized coefficients and standardized coefficients
from ordinary least squares regression analyses.
Source: Comparative Study of Electoral Systems, Module I; available from www.cses.org.


being significant. These results reinforce the point that polarization is the
key variable, not the quantity of parties.
   In summary, the nature of the choices available to voters is strongly
related to the level of turnout in elections. However, the number of parties,
although easily measured, is less important than the diversity of choices
that the parties offer.


                 Polarization and Democratic Politics

    The point of this article was not to criticize the concept of party system
fractionalization. Counting the number of parties has proven to be one of
the more powerful theoretical and empirical concepts in explaining important aspects of party competition and even the workings of the democratic
process (e.g., Klingemann, 2005; Lijphart, 1999; Powell, 1982, 2000;
Taagepera & Shugart, 1989).
    However, I maintain that counting the number of parties is often a surrogate for a richer characteristic of a party system that is more difficult to
measure—party system polarization. Polarization measures how parties are
dispersed along an ideological continuum, indicating the range of ideological choices that parties represent and not just the discrete number of parties. Embedded in formal theories and empirical analyses of party system is


916   Comparative Political Studies


the belief that this ideological dispersion does matter, and this research
focused on testing this belief.
    An initial finding is that these two party system characteristics—
polarization and fractionalization—can vary almost independently of one
another (also see Gross & Sigelman, 1984). I used public perceptions of party
positions to measure party system polarization and then to demonstrate its
independence from fractionalization. Thus, this research shows that simply
counting the number of parties may be easier and readily available for most
party systems, but in many cases it will miss the property of party systems
that is of prime interest.
    Second, I found clear empirical differences in the correlates of polarization and fractionalization. The polarization of a party system is related to
stronger correlations between class and the Left–Right relationship with
party preferences. To the extent that political parties are supposed to be channels of expression that allow citizens to vote their preferences (Sartori, 1976),
then party system polarization substantially strengthens this process—but
party fractionalization has little impact on these relationships. Similarly,
voting turnout appears more strongly related to party system polarization
than fractionalization. Moreover, because of the expansion in the number of
democracies, these effects appear for a broader range of democracies than
has typically been found in earlier studies on party systems. In addition, the
two modules of the CSES have already provided replications of several of
my findings.
    This does not mean that counting the number of parties is irrelevant. In
some cases, the number of parties may be of prime interest, such as the
increase in coalition negotiation costs as the number of parties increases. In
other instances, the number of parties may be the only surrogate for partysystem diversity. However, when party system effects are contingent on
processes linked to the ideological distance between voters and parties,
such as the two examples presented here, then we should strive to add
polarization measures to the analyses of party and political behavior.
    Indeed, the evidence of polarization effects described here suggests that
further attention to past studies of party system fractionalization is warranted. Arend Lijphart (1999), for example, emphasized the number of parties as an element of consociational democracy, largely derived from his
initial research on the Netherlands. However, the relationship between parties may be more important than the number of parties; thus, polarization in
the Dutch 1998 election with many parties was barely higher than the
British 1997 election with its two-and-a-half party system. Similarly, the
stability of political systems should be more a function of the polarization


                                                       Dalton / Party System Polarization      917


of parties than the fractionalization of the party system (Powell, 1982). In
the end, quality should count more than quantity.


                                             Notes
   1. The effective number of parties is calculated as follows:
   Effective Number of Parties = ________________________________      .
                                  ∑(party seat share in legislaturei)2

    This means that the relationship between the Herfindahl and Laasko–Taapera measures is
formally nonlinear, but in practice, a linear correlation shows a very strong relationship.
    2. The data used in this study were downloaded from the Comparative Study of Electoral
Systems (CSES) Web site (www.cses.org). The Web site also includes documentation on the
survey. I did not use the Belarus or Hong Kong surveys because these are not based on democratic elections, and a few nations did not include the Left–Right battery. I added the 1998
Philippines CSES survey that was provided by the Social Weather Station. All the analyses and
interpretations of these data are my own.
    3. The Japanese survey used a Progressive–Conservatives scale as an equivalent to
Left–Right. The Left–Right question is widely used in electoral research in other democratic
party systems (Dalton, 2006; Fuchs & Klingemann, 1989; Inglehart, 1990; Inglehart &
Klingemann, 1976).
    4. I thank Rein Taagepera and Aiji Tanaka for their advice in developing this index. In some
nations, the survey did not ask for the position of some significant parties and therefore they were
not included in the calculation of polarization. I had less than 80% of the election vote share in
Brazil, Israel, Lithuania, and Peru, so these nations might be interpreted with caution.
    5. Caul and Gray (2000), Pennings (1998), and Sigelman and Yough (1978) use a formula
for the variance of the distribution, without taking the square root of differences to moderate
the impact of extreme scores that are squared in the numerator. To avoid the exaggeration of
squared differences in another way, Gross and Sigelman (1984) calculate the absolute value
of the difference, and Klingemann (2005) calculates the absolute differences between pairs of
parties in his set.
    6. To be consistent with other analyses of party fractionalization, I create a fractionalization
measure that is 1 – Herfindahl index. This simply transposes the Herfindahl index so that higher
values equal greater fractionalization. The Herfindahl index of legislative fractionalization is
from the World Bank Political Institutions database, Database of Political Institutions 2004
(http://econ.worldbank.org). The Herfindahl index is available by year from the World Bank
database for every nation so that I can easily match results to the CSES surveys.
      7. District magnitude is drawn from the World Bank Political Institutions database; see
Note 6.
      8. For instance, using the examples of Figure 1, the standard deviations for the public in
Canada (1.90 in 2004) and Spain (2.10 in 2004) are quite similar, but the party Polarization
index values are much more distinct. Similarly, the standard deviations for Slovenia (2.14 in
1996) and the Czech Republic (2.54 in 2002) are more similar than the Polarization index
scores for these two nations.
      9. I used the question on which party best represents the respondent’s opinions as the
dependent variable (B3024), because this included the largest number of respondents in most


918    Comparative Political Studies


nations and was most comparable across different elections for presidents or the lower or
upper house of Parliament. The class variable is B2012 in the CSES dataset (April 2006
release). I excluded the Philippines from these analyses because only a very small proportion
of the respondents were willing to express their partisanship on any question.
    10. To illustrate how fractionalization and effective number of parties yield equivalent
results because of their high intercorrelation, I related both to the level of class voting and
Left–Right voting using the CSES Module II. Fractionalization has a .32 and –.02 correlation
with both variables as described in the text. The effective number of parties yields .25 and .00
correlations for these same two relationships.
    11. Module I does not have the same question on the preferred party. Therefore, I use party
choice in the legislative election or the presidential election if there was not a legislative election (A2029, A2030).
    12. Similar to Norris (2004), I measure turnout based on the voting age population and
draw these data from the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance
(http://www.idea.int/vt/survey/index.cfm). However, the voting age population statistics are
not available for the most recent elections, so I limited the analyses to the Module I nations
where the data are available.
    13. The other aggregate predictors were human development, district size, the frequency
of national elections, and three measures of party system fractionalization (electoral system,
party competition, and effective number of parliamentary parties). See Norris (2004, pp. 158159). I would like to include additional variables, but the results of Table 2 suggest that there
are relatively few cases for the number of predictors.


                                        References
Adams, J., Merrill, S., & Grofman, B. (2005). A unified theory of party competition: A crossnational analysis integrating spatial and behavioral. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Blais, A., & Dobrzynska, A. (1998). Turnout in electoral democracies. European Journal of
   Political Research, 33, 239-261.
Budge, I., Robertson, D., & Hearl, D. (Eds.). (1987). Ideology, strategy and party change: Spatial
   analysis of postwar election programmes in 19 democracies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
   University Press.
Caul, M., & Gray, M. (2000). From platform declarations to policy outcomes. In R. Dalton &
   M. Wattenberg (Eds.), Parties without partisans (pp. 208-237). Oxford, UK: Oxford
   University Press.
Cox, G. (1990). Centripetal and centrifugal incentives in electoral systems. American Journal
   of Political Science, 34, 903-935.
Dalton, R. J. (2006). Social modernization and the end of ideology debate: Patterns of ideological polarization. Japanese Journal of Political Science, 7, 1-22.
Downs, A. (1957). An economic theory of democracy. New York: Harper.
Evans, J. (2002). In defence of Sartori: Party system change, voter preference distributions and
   other competitive incentives. Party Politics, 8, 155-174.
Fuchs, D., & Klingemann, H. (1989). The Left–Right schema. In M. K. Jennings & J. van Deth
   (Eds.), Continuities in political action (pp. 203-234). Berlin, Germany: de Gruyter.
Gabel, M., & Huber, J. (2000). Putting parties in their place: Inferring party Left–Right
   ideological positions from party manifestos data. American Journal of Political Science,
   44, 94-103.


                                                      Dalton / Party System Polarization      919


Gross, D. A., & Sigelman, L. (1984). Comparing party systems: A multidimensional approach.
    Comparative Politics, 16(4), 463-479.
Harmel, R., Tan, A., & Janda, K. (1995, September). Substance vs. packaging: An empirical
    analysis of parties’ issue identity. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
    Political Science Association, Chicago.
Huber, J., & Inglehart, R. (1995). Expert interpretations of party space and party locations in
    42 societies. Party Politics, 1, 73-111.
Inglehart, R. (1990). Culture shift in advanced industrial society. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press.
Inglehart, R., & Klingemann, H. (1976). Party identification, ideological preference and the
    Left-Right dimension among Western mass publics. In I. Budge, D. Crewe, & J. Farlie
    (Eds.), Party identification and beyond (pp. 243-273). London: Wiley.
Jackman, R., & Miller, R. (1995). Voter turnout in industrial democracies during the 1980s.
    Comparative Political Studies, 27, 467-492.
Kim, H., Powell, G. B., & Fording, R. (2006, April). Party systems and substantive representation: Static and dynamic performance. Paper presented at the annual meetings of the
    Midwest Political Science Association Meeting, Chicago.
Klingemann, H. (2005). Political parties and party systems. In J. Thomassen (Ed.), The
    European voter: A comparative study of modern democracies (pp. 22-63). Oxford, UK:
    Oxford University Press.
Knutsen, O. (1998). Expert judgments of the Left–Right location of political parties: A comparative longitudinal study. West European Politics, 21(2), 63-94.
Knutsen, O. (1999). Left–Right party polarization among the mass publics. In H. Narud &
    T. Aalberg (Eds.), Challenges to representative democracy (pp. 229-277). Bergen,
    Sweden: Fagbokforlaget.
Laakso, M., & Taagepera, R. (1979). Effective number of parties: A measure with application
    to West Europe. Comparative Political Studies, 12, 3-27.
Laver, M., & Garry, J. (2000). Estimating policy positions from political texts. American
    Journal of Political Science, 44(3), 619-634.
Laver, M., & Hunt, W. B. (1992). Policy and party competition. New York: Routledge.
Laver, M., & Schofield, N. (1990). Multiparty government: The politics of coalition in Europe.
    Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lijphart, A. (1999). Democracies. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Lijphart, A., & Grofman, B. (Eds.). (1991). Electoral laws and their political consequences.
    New York: Agathon.
Lipset, S. M., & Rokkan, S. (Eds.). (1967). Party systems and voter alignments. New York:
    Free Press.
Norris, P. (2004). Electoral engineering: Voting rules and political behavior. New York:
    Cambridge University Press.
Pennings, Paul. (1998). The triad of party system change: Votes, office and policy. In P. Pennings
    & J. Lane (Eds.), Comparing party system change (pp. 79-100). London: Routledge.
Powell, G. B. (1982). Contemporary democracies: Participation, stability and violence.
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Powell, G. B. (2000). Elections as instruments of democracy: Majoritarian and proportional
    visions. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Rae, D. (1971). The political consequences of electoral laws (2nd ed.). New Haven, CT: Yale
    University Press.


920    Comparative Political Studies


Sartori, G. (1976). Parties and party systems. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sigelman, L., & Yough, S. N. (1978) Left–Right polarization in national party systems:
    A cross-national analysis. Comparative Political Studies, 11(3), 355-379.
Taagepera, R., & Shugart, M. (1989). Seats and votes. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Taylor, M., & Herman, V. M. (1971). Party systems and government stability. American
    Political Science Review, 65, 28-37.

Russell J. Dalton is a professor of political science at the University of California, Irvine, and
was the founding director of the Center for the Study of Democracy. He has been a Fulbright
Research fellow at the University of Mannheim, a German Marshall Research fellow, and a
POSCO fellow at the East/West Center. His scholarly interests include comparative political
behavior, political parties, social movements, and democratic development.