Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties


      ISSN: 1745-7289 (Print) 1745-7297 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fbep20


Populism, party membership, and language
complexity in the Italian chamber of deputies

Silvia Decadri & Constantine Boussalis

To cite this article: Silvia Decadri & Constantine Boussalis (2019): Populism, party membership,
and language complexity in the Italian chamber of deputies, Journal of Elections, Public Opinion
and Parties, DOI: 10.1080/17457289.2019.1593182

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/17457289.2019.1593182


       Published online: 19 Mar 2019.


       Submit your article to this journal


       Article views: 43


       View Crossmark data


                     Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
            https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fbep20


JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES
https://doi.org/10.1080/17457289.2019.1593182


Populism, party membership, and language
complexity in the Italian chamber of deputies
Silvia Decadri             and Constantine Boussalis
Political Science, University of Dublin Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland


    ABSTRACT
    Common wisdom suggests that populist politicians use a simple language.
    While scholars have provided vast anecdotal evidence of populists’ plain
    speech style, the empirical literature on populist communication oﬀers very
    few and mixed comprehensive evaluations of the complexity of elected
    oﬃcials’ language. This paper relies on a novel populist dictionary and 78,855
    utterances from the 17th Italian parliament – March 2013–July 2016 – to
    comprehensively study the link between populism and speech complexity.
    We argue that ideological and electoral considerations lead populist parties
    and politicians to employ a straightforward language. Moreover, we claim that
    party membership shapes the rhetoric of elected oﬃcials, leading members of
    populist parties to use a simpler language. Using computer-assisted text
    analytic techniques to inspect parliamentary speeches given by the members
    of nine Italian parties, we perform a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis of the
    inﬂuence of party switching on legislators’ behaviour. Our results suggest that
    populist ideology, electoral strategy, and party membership inﬂuence
    legislators’ language complexity. Our overarching conclusion is that language
    simplicity might be thought of as a feature of populist communication. This
    arguably has implications for the ability of populist actors to use a simple
    communication style to outperform their mainstream counterparts when
    competing for voters’ support.


Introduction
Populist politicians are said to use a simple language when communicating
with the electorate (Albertazzi and McDonnell 2007). Some scholars have estimated Donald Trump’s language, for instance, as analogous to that of a sixth
grader (Schumacher and Eskenazi 2016). Juan Peron’s language, even if not
simplistic in its content, has been described as “comprehensible not only
for the highly educated but also for the lower classes” (Rooduijn 2014).
Members of the French National Front are said to use a plainspoken language
(Davies 2012). Silvio Berlusconi’s rhetoric has been deﬁned as popular and
easily understandable (Albertazzi and McDonnell 2007; Tarchi 2003).

CONTACT Silvia Decadri      decadris@tcd.ie      University of Dublin Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland
   Supplemental data for this article can be accessed https://doi.org/10.1080/17457289.2019.1593182.
© 2019 Elections, Public Opinion & Parties


2      S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


    While these anecdotal accounts are indicative, the empirical literature on
populist communication thus far oﬀers very few and mixed comprehensive
evaluations of the correlation between populism and the complexity of
elected oﬃcials’ communication (Bischof and Senninger 2017; Brosius et al.
2017). This study provides a systematic analysis of the relationship between
populist ideology and political communication style. We ﬁrst oﬀer a theoretical discussion on the connection between populism and language complexity. We argue that ideological and electoral considerations lead populist
politicians and parties to employ a straightforward language. Moreover, we
claim that party membership shapes elected oﬃcials’ rhetoric and leads
members of populist parties to use a plain speech style. To test the relationship between populism and language complexity, we employ a large-scale
analysis of Italian MPs’ parliamentary oral communication during the 17th legislature – March 2013–July 2016. We use computer-assisted text analysis to
inspect parliamentary speeches given by the members of nine Italian political
parties. A cross-sectional analysis of MP spoken language, as well as a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis of the inﬂuence of party switching on language
usage, provide evidence that populist ideology, populist electoral strategy,
and party membership inﬂuence legislators’ language complexity. Our overarching conclusion is that language simplicity might be thought of as a
feature of populist communication. Such elementary language, when used
to explain complex issues in a straightforward manner and to oﬀer simple solutions, can eﬀectively attract electors’ attention and support (see Albertazzi
and McDonnell 2007, 1–8). The relationship between populism and language
complexity thus arguably has implications for the ability of populist actors to
use a simple communication style to outperform their mainstream counterparts when competing for voter support (Bischof and Senninger 2017).


Related work
The literature oﬀers numerous descriptive accounts of European populist
parties and political leaders who employ a simpliﬁed speech style to communicate with their electorate. The spontaneous and non-institutionalized
language spoken by members of the populist Italian Lega Nord party is considered one of the main features of the party’s ideology and rhetoric (Albertazzi and McDonnell 2007, 88–90). The electoral success of the Swiss
People’s Party in the 1990s is ascribed to the simple and media-friendly
language used by Christoph Blocher (see Kriesi et al. 2005, 6). Beppe Grillo,
leader of the Italian populist Five Star Movement, is said to communicate
with his electorate through a simple language which functionally aims to
articulate complex concepts to the layperson (Bordignon and Ceccarini 2013).
   Comprehensive empirical studies of populist communication style are still
quite rare though, and they show mixed empirical evidence. For example,


                                        JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES                      3


Bischof and Senninger (2017) study the eﬀect of populism on the complexity
of campaign messaging in Austria and Germany and ﬁnd empirical evidence
of a positive eﬀect of populist rhetoric on text complexity. Similarly, Schumacher and Eskenazi (2016) ﬁnd that the complexity of Donald Trump’s campaign speeches is just below the sixth-grade level, Degani (2016) shows
that Trump’s presidential campaign announcements have an average grade
level of 5 on the Flesch-Kincaid scale. On the other hand, Brosius et al.
(2017) measure the complexity of speeches from the German Bundestag
and six EU member states’ heads of government, and they observe a higher
language complexity for the speeches of the right-wing populist AfD.
   While the literature analysing the relation between populist ideology and
speech complexity oﬀers instructive insights, we ﬁnd two main limitations.
Most of the contributions are in the form of anecdotal accounts. Comprehensive empirical studies, which are still quite rare, show mixed empirical evidence. Our study oﬀers further insight on the connection between
populism and language complexity by building on the existing literature on
populist ideology and electoral strategy, and by employing text analytic
methods to study Italian MPs’ oral communication.


Theoretical expectations
Populist ideology, electoral strategy and party membership
Building on previous contributions, we argue that populists have ideological
and electoral reasons to employ a straightforward language (Bischof and Senninger 2017). To characterize the populist ideology, we rely on Mudde (2004)’s
framework whereby populism is understood as a “thin ideology” that consists
of two elements: people-centrism and anti-elitism. Populism divides societies
into two opposing and monolithic groups, the “pure people” and the “corrupt
and self-interested elite” (see also Rooduijn and Pauwels 2011). To demonstrate a complete identiﬁcation with their “popular” electorate, populists
need to use a language that reﬂects people’s “simplicity” (Albertazzi and
McDonnell 2007). Moreover, a simple language constitutes an eﬀective propaganda instrument.1 Populists strategically employ a straightforward rhetoric
to persuade voters that their political programme and actions belong to
them – the people (Dramnescu 2014). We argue that these ideological and
electoral considerations are part of the coordinated electoral strategy of populist parties, as well as of the individual electoral strategy of populist politicians.
    Conventional wisdom in legislative studies tells us that legislators’ behaviour is driven both by their own policy preferences and by the party line. It
thus seems natural to assume that electoral and ideological considerations
    In a similar vein, Spirling (2016) shows that British MPs “simpliﬁed” their speech style after the Franchise
     Extension 1867 in UK to appeal to a broader, “popular” electorate.


4        S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


inﬂuence political communication both at the individual and party level.
Moreover, previous contributions provided anecdotal evidence of populist
politicians employing a simple rhetoric (Albertazzi and McDonnell 2007;
Kriesi et al. 2005), as well as statistical support for the hypothesis that populist
parties employ a simple language in their oﬃcial communication (Bischof and
Senninger 2017).
   Accordingly, we posit:
    H1: Populist ideology, both at the individual and party level, is negatively related
    to the complexity of an MP’s oral communication, while controlling for personal
    characteristics such us age, gender, education and profession.

While previous contributions have provided important insights on the role of
a party’s populist ideology in inﬂuencing the complexity of a party’s ofﬁcial
communication – namely, electoral manifestos – we argue that a party’s populist ideology can also shape the speech style of its members. More precisely,
we claim that party afﬁliation inﬂuences the rhetoric of an MP when she
speaks in parliament. Since we do not speciﬁcally analyse the causal mechanism that leads party membership to inﬂuence MPs’ rhetoric, we propose two
viable mechanisms through which party membership can affect an MP’s
speech style.
    The ﬁrst and most compelling explanation is that a deputy’s rhetoric could
be inﬂuenced by the speech style of her colleagues. The standard account in
the study of legislative norms emphasizes the socialization of new members
by veteran members, in national assemblies (Asher 1973; Bowler, Farrell, and
Katz 1999). Norms, like reciprocity or legislative work, deﬁne the standard of
conduct expected by the members of a certain legislative body. When newcomers enter the legislature, they learn the relevant norms through a process of
interaction and socialization with the veteran members. We argue that a similar
socialization process could lead newcomers in a political party to change their
speech style to match that of their colleagues. When an MP enters a populist
party, she encounters shared “norms of communication”, which prescribe
that members use a simple speech style. This could lead the newcomer to
adapt her rhetoric, so that she would comply with the existing norms.
    Party leaders too could shape the content of party members’ speeches and,
consequently, inﬂuence their communication style when they speak in parliament. While most of the literature on legislative behaviour has concentrated
on the study of the voting agenda, Proksch and Slapin (2012) show that party
aﬃliation matters also when studying parliamentary speeches. The authors
explain that party leaders’ have an incentive to control the content of party
members’ speeches and to make sure that only speeches aligned with the
party ideology make it to the ﬂoor. Voters can easily access plenary speeches;
thus, it is very important that MPs speaking in parliament convey an image of
a cohesive and uniﬁed party (see also Maltzman and Sigelman 1996; Proksch


                                    JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES                   5


and Slapin 2015, 22).2 Researchers have shown that party leaders are able to
coordinate the speeches given by their party members. For example, Harris
(2005) shows that Democratic and Republican leadership have designed
party organizations aimed at disciplining the one-minute speeches given by
House members before the legislative day. Thanks to these organizations,
party leaders can control and structure the content of their members’
speeches (see also Morris 2001). Proksch and Slapin (2012) and Giannetti
and Pedrazzani (2016) show that party leaders in the UK, Germany and
Italy, can restrict access to the ﬂoor so that MPs who give speeches that
comply with the party’s ideology and policy positions receive more speaking
time. Since conveying straightforward messages is a deﬁning characteristic of
the populist ideology and electoral strategy, populist party leaderships will
likely be interested in ensuring that their members’ speeches express argumentations that are easily understandable by the electorate. Party leaders
could ask to read party members speeches before they take the ﬂoor and
approve only those whose content is simple enough to comply with the
party’s ideology and electoral strategy. A straightforward speech style
would then appear to be the most appropriate stylistic choice to express a
pre-approved straightforward content.
    Based on these considerations, we posit:
    H2: A change in aﬃliation from a populist to a mainstream parliamentary group
    increases a parliamentarian’s language complexity.

To uncover the inﬂuence of party membership on the rhetoric employed by
MPs, we build on previous contributions and employ party3 switching to
obtain analytic leverage on the effect of partisanship on legislators’ behaviour
(e.g. Krehbiel 1993; McCarty 2001; Nokken 2000; Rosenthal and Voeten 2004).
We interpret a change in language complexity that follows a party switch as
the independent effect of party membership on legislators’ behaviour – in this
case, communication behaviour.


Methods
Outcome and independent variables
Our dependent variable is the readability of an MP’s oral communication in
the Italian Parliament. We focus on parliamentary speeches4 for several
reasons. Parliamentary debates constitute an open forum for communication
where an MP can publicly explain her policy opinions to voters (Proksch and
  For a more detailed discussion on parliamentary speeches’ access to voters see also Section 4.1.
  In this case, party-owned parliamentary group.
  We automatically retrieved speeches from the Italian Parliament website (http://www.parlamento.it). The
   procedure also entails text pre-processing steps: we have removed HTML tags, stop words, and formal
   titles, like “Ministro”.


6        S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


Slapin 2012). Moreover, the media enhance the communicative power of parliamentary debates by providing access to the public at large (Maltzman and
Sigelman 1996). Televised news broadcasts show extracts of parliamentary
debates on a regular basis and many parliaments post videos of legislative
speeches on their website (Proksch and Slapin 2012). The Italian Parliament
is no exception as it oﬀers live streams5 of parliamentary debates and has a
YouTube6 channel where it broadcasts the activities of the House. We operationalize readability using the G-index.7 We have collapsed every utterance
found in the oﬃcial transcript by MP and parliamentary group. This means
that if an MP changed parliamentary group aﬃliation within the sample
period, she has been measured separately after the move.
   Our main explanatory variable is populist ideology. To measure individuallevel populism, we apply a novel dictionary of Italian populist rhetoric to the
parliamentary speeches collapsed by MP and parliamentary group, to obtain
the percentage of populist words used by every MP. The procedure results in
the construction of three explanatory variables: Populism and its sub-components, Anti-elitism and People-centrism. Populism combines peoplecentric and anti-elitist terms, giving the overall percentage of populist
words employed by an MP. Anti-elitism and People-centrism measure the percentage of anti-elite and pro-people words used by an MP. To disentangle the
eﬀect of party membership from that of individual-level populism, we include
parliamentary group dummies. We expect members of populist parties to
speak more simply. We also control for demographic characteristics of a
given MP – age, gender, education, and professional skill level. We expect
more educated and higher skilled MPs to speak in a more complex manner.
We do not have strong theoretical priors on how gender and age might
predict speech complexity.


Constructing a dictionary of Italian political populism
In Section 3.1 we deﬁne populism as an ideology that divides societies into
two opposing groups, the people and the elite. Accordingly, we construct
our measure of populism with the aim of capturing words and expressions
that relate both to the people-centric and anti-elitist components of the populist ideology. We follow previous studies (Jagers and Walgrave 2007; Pauwels
2011; Rooduijn and Pauwels 2011) and measure the level of populism using a
dictionary approach (see Table 1). Our dictionary is novel in that we expand
upon Rooduijn and Pauwels (2011)’s dictionary by including a peoplecentric component. Rooduijn and Pauwels (2011) chose to exclude this
  http://webtv.camera.it/home.
  https://www.youtube.com/user/cameradeideputati.
  The G-index readability function has been re-engineered from the textstat readability function by Benoit
   et al. (2017).


                                       JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES                         7


Table 1. Populism dictionary.
                                            Italian populist terms                           English translation
Anti-elitism                                antidemocratic*                                  undemocratic*
                                            casta I ̵                                        caste
                                            consens*                                         consensus*
                                            corrot*                                          corrupt*
                                            disonest*                                        dishonest*
                                            elit*                                            elit*
                                            establishment I ̵I ̵                             establishm*
                                            ingann*                                          deceit*
                                            mentir*                                          lie*
                                            menzogn*                                         lie*
                                            partitocrazia                                    establishm*
                                            propagand*                                       propagand*
                                            scandal*                                         scandal*
                                            tradim* §                                        betray*
                                            tradir* §                                        betray*
                                            tradit* §                                        betray*
                                            vergogn*                                         shame*
                                            verita’                                          truth*
People-centrism                             abitant*                                         citizen*
                                            cittadin*                                        citizen*
                                            consumator*                                      consumer*
                                            contribuent*                                     taxpayer*
                                            elettor*                                         voter*
                                            gente                                            people
                                            popol*                                           popol*
Note: This table reports the terms used in our dictionary of Italian political populism. Italian and Englishtranslated terms are displayed. We append the Rooduijn and Pauwels (2011) dictionary with the following terms: (I ̵) “casta”, a frequently used synonym of “elite”; (I ̵ I ̵) the English word “establishment”, often
 used in reference to “partyocracy (partitocrazia)”; (§) the original dictionary by Rooduijn and Pauwels
 (2011) includes “tradi”, which may capture unrelated words like “tradizione” (“tradition”) – we therefore
 include diﬀerent Italian translations of the word “betray”, such as “tradim*”, “tradir*” and “tradit*”.


dimension from their dictionary, arguing that a large share of people-centric
communication is composed of personal pro-nouns such as “we” and “our”,
which are used in speech more generally. We agree that such pronouns,
while capturing an important aspect of the “us-versus-them” element of the
populist ideology, can overlap with irrelevant speech. However, the same
argument could be made in relation to the anti-elite component. Pronouns
such as “they” are also likely to be very common in both populist and unrelated discussion.
   We propose an alternative approach which avoids the inclusion of pronouns, while incorporating other terms that may accurately reﬂect the propeople aspect of populist rhetoric without succumbing to the problems correctly pointed out by Rooduijn and Pauwels (2011). Speciﬁcally, this dimension of our dictionary contains the Italian translations of the words
indicated by Jagers and Walgrave (2007) in their description of the propeople populist rhetoric.8 Moreover, we make a few adjustments to the
    The G-index readability function has been re-engineered from the textstat readability function by Benoit
     et al. (2017).


8           S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


Italian variant of the Rooduijn and Pauwels (2011)’s dictionary which had been
translated by the authors from the original English version. We exclude the
term “politici*”, which in English refers exclusively to a politician or the political class, while in Italian it can refer to several unrelated concepts since it can
also be an adjective. We add the term “casta”, a frequently used synonym of
elite. We remove the word “referendum” to avoid a potentially misleading categorization of references to the widely discussed referendums on the privatisation of water services held in 2011 as instances of populist rhetoric.


Dictionary validation
Computer-assisted text analysis should always be coupled with explicit validation. Unfortunately, researchers often employ newly devised dictionaries
without previously verifying their validity, thus running the risk of producing
misleading results. Following best practices of validation for supervised text
analytic methods, we perform an out-of-sample validation relying on a
corpus of party press releases (Grimmer and Stewart 2013). The validation procedure works in three steps: (1) we identify allegedly populist parties in Italy
based on the academic literature and on the opinions shared by observers of
Italian politics; (2) we collect an external source of oﬃcial party communication for all parties in our sample; (3) we apply our populist dictionary to
the newly collected out-of-sample set and observe agreement between
them. If our dictionary constitutes a valid measure, we would expect that
populist parties will use more populist terms in their oﬃcial communication.
    Which Italian political parties are populist? It is clear that Lega Nord (LN) and
Movimento 5 Stelle (M5S) are populist parties (Albertazzi and McDonnell 2007;
Bordignon and Ceccarini 2013; Fella and Ruzza 2013). However, there is some
disagreement over the level of populism of Il Popolo della Liberta (PdL) and
Fratelli d’Italia-Centro Destra Nazionale (FDI-CDN). All other parties – Partito
Democratico (PD), Sinistra Ecologia e Liberta (SEL), Centro Democratico (CD),
Scelta Civica (SC) and Unione di Centro (UDC) – are widely considered mainstream (see also Appendix A). We expect higher populist term frequencies in
press releases from LN, M5S, PdL and FDI-CDN. Our choice of press releases
for the validation corpus is based on previous literature that demonstrates
how press releases reliably represent party and party member ideology (e.g.
Grimmer 2010; Haselmayer, Wagner, and Meyer 2017; Sagarzazu and Klüver
2017; Wagner and Meyer 2014). Also, political parties typically issue press
releases on a regular basis, thereby ensuring a substantial level of data for
the validation. The press releases corpus contains all available press releases9
    We automatically retrieved the press releases from oﬃcial party websites. For a summary of the corpus by
     party, see Appendix B. We perform the dictionary analysis on the original text, with no pre-processing
     steps taken.


                                    JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES                  9


from the websites of all the nine Italian political parties considered in our
analysis.10
    The left panel of Figure 1 displays the share of populist words identiﬁed by
our dictionary within a given party’s corpus of press releases. Based on the discussion in Section 4.2, statistics of allegedly populist parties are marked with
an orange diamond while those of mainstream parties are shown as blue
squares. As expected, M5S and LN appear to be leaders in the usage of populist terms. PdL remains slightly above the median, while FDI-CDN exhibits percentages closer to those of the mainstream parties. We also observe how
party press releases communicate concepts related to the two theoretical
components of populism. The middle plot of Figure 1 shows the relative frequency of anti-elitist terms by party. LN still exhibits a quite high percentage
and is followed by M5S, PdL and FDI-CDN. The right panel of Figure 1 displays
the relative frequencies of people-centric terms. In line with our expectations,
M5S and LN exhibit the highest share of people-centric words in their press
releases. PdL also rank highly, while FDI-CDN does not seem to exhibit a consistent people-centric rhetoric in its press releases. While unexpected, the low
levels of people-centrist term usage exhibited by FDI-CDN can be attributed to
its strong nationalist ideology, which prefers to refer to “the people” in ethnic
terms, i.e. “Italians”11 (see also Appendix A).
    Notwithstanding some inconsistencies, in general we ﬁnd that allegedly
populist parties are leaders in the usage of populist terms, while mainstream
parties are less inclined to use such words. We would also like to stress that
while we think that showing validation results for the two components of
our populism measure adds further transparency to our validation procedure,
we do not have strong theoretical priors on why a party should employ relatively more terms belonging to one component or the other. More precisely,
we consider the two components as equally important in deﬁning a party’s
populist rhetoric and we do not diﬀerentiate between anti-elitist and
people-centric parties. Therefore, we are mostly interested in producing a
measure of populism that validly captures the stronger overall presence of
populist terms in populist parties’ political communication, with respect to
mainstream parties’ political communication. Importantly, the dictionary
also conforms with our theoretical expectations when applied to the parliamentary speeches, which is the corpus we rely on for the empirical tests in
Sections 5.1 and 5.2 (see also Appendix C). Given the above, we satisﬁed
  UDC is an enthusiastic member of the European People’s Party (EPP). SC and CD, even though they are
   not represented in the European Parliament, sustain EPP’s view and action. This is conﬁrmed by the
   many references to EPP found in their press releases. To avoid confounding references to the European
   Popular Area-EPP with people-centric rhetoric, we have removed them from UDC, SC and CD press
   releases.
  For a detailed discussion on the diﬀerence between people as ethnos and as demos in nationalistic and
   populist rhetoric, see Albertazzi and McDonnell (2007).


10       S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


Figure 1. Application of a populist dictionary to Italian party press releases. This ﬁgure
displays the average percentage of populist words among all available online press
releases of nine major Italian political parties (n = 16; 396). Speciﬁcally, Populism includes
all terms from the components Anti-elitism and People-centrism as deﬁned in Table 1.
Allegedly populist parties are marked with an orange diamond, mainstream parties
are shown as blue squares.


that our metric of populist communication possesses suﬃcient face and construct validity (Adcock and Collier 2001).


Language complexity
We evaluate language complexity in terms of readability using the Gulpease
index (G-index) (Lucisano and Piemontese 1988).
                                                300∗St − 10∗C
                           Gulpease = 89 +                                                (1)
                                                      W
St indicates the number of sentences, C the number of characters and W the
number of words. Gulpease assesses readability based on the average number
of characters per word and the average number of words per sentence. Most
of the traditional readability metrics, such as the Flesch-Kincaid or the
Gunning fog indexes, have been constructed to assess the complexity of
the English language. The use of readability indexes that are calibrated on
the English language to study the complexity of texts written in Italian can
produce inconsistencies due to the diﬀerent morphological structures of


                                   JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES                     11


the two languages12 (Franchina and Vacca 1986). Gulpease has been used
widely by researchers who engage with the Italian language, ranging from
topics such as school bullying (Gini et al. 2008) to the readability of political
blogs (Bigi 2013). The scale of the index ranges from 0 to 100, where larger
values indicate higher readability, i.e. lower language complexity.


Regression analysis
To test our ﬁrst hypothesis, we employ a set of cross-sectional multivariate
linear regression models to estimate the eﬀect of populist language, party
aﬃliation, and demographic characteristics on the spoken language readability of MPs in parliament. The level of analysis is the MP. We have chosen an
allegedly mainstream party led by a former technocrat (SC)13 as the reference
category for the parliamentary groups dummies. In the ﬁrst model, we include
a combined measure of populist language as the main explanatory variable,
while in a second model we explain the variation of language readability
with the people-centric and anti-elitist characteristics of an MP’s oral communication. Since we treat MPs who have changed party aﬃliation as separate observations, we include robust standard errors clustered by MP for all
models.


Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis
Treatment and control groups
To test our second hypothesis, we perform a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis.
In an ideal setting, we would wish to observe changes in language complexity
for legislators who move from a populist to a mainstream party and legislators
who move in the inverse. If party eﬀects are present, we would expect that
MPs in the former (latter) group would increase (decrease) their spoken
language complexity. Unfortunately, our data include only instances of
switching from a populist to a mainstream party. Therefore, we concentrate
our analysis only on this case to draw inferences on the eﬀect of party switching on rhetorical style. In our dataset, we observe 19 MPs who moved from
PdL to UDC14, four from M5S to PD, and one from M5S to SC (see also Appendix H).
  Relying on the counting of syllables, as done by the Flesch-Kincaid index, is not appropriate for the
   Italian language due to the presence of diphthongs and accents (Dell’Orletta, Montemagni, and
   Venturi 2011).
  SC is a centrist party founded in the lead up to the 2013 general election by Mario Monti, outgoing Prime
   Minister of the 2011–2013 caretaker government.
  The total number of MPs moving from PdL to UDC, during the period considered, is 21. However, two of
   them go back to the MISTO group after moving to UDC. Since MISTO is not a “party-owned” group, we
   do not consider these moves as treatments and we do not include these MPs in our analysis.


12        S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


   We acknowledge the diﬀerent nature of the two treatments. In fact, while
conventional wisdom on Italian populism would consider the two treatment
groups as comparable, deeper inspection shows that relevant diﬀerences
exist. We base such distinction on the magnitude of the diﬀerence in the
level of populist ideology between the populist and mainstream parties
that are relevant to a particular switch. We deﬁne the level of populist ideology of a party as the average share of populist terms used by its members
when speaking in parliament.
   Beginning with the M5S case, based on the descriptive and statistical analyses in Sections 4.2 and 4.4, members of M5S, on average, use more populist
terms than MPs from PD or SC.15 That is, there is a clear and substantive diﬀerence in populist ideology between these parties. In contrast, the diﬀerence in
populism between PdL and UDC is not as clear cut. Based on our discussion in
Section 4.2, our observations of populist rhetoric displayed in Appendix C, and
a diﬀerence in means test, we can conclude that the populist divide between
UDC and PdL seems to be marginal.16 Based on this consideration, we deﬁne
the switch from M5S to PD/SC as a strong treatment, while a move from PdL to
UDC is understood as a weaker treatment.


Statistical methods
Since we necessarily rely on observational data, we cannot assume that the
analysed switchers are a random sample of all the MPs. To account for potential confounders in our quasi-experiment, we employ a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences (DiD) design, with time and MP ﬁxed-eﬀects. Moreover, given that
the MPs included in our analysis who changed parliamentary group did so
at diﬀerent points in time, we have multiple treatment groups. To estimate
our staggered-DiD model we regress the following time and MP ﬁxedeﬀects model17:
                                   Git = ai + lt + bDit + 1it                                      (2)
Where Git is the G-index of readability for individual i at yearly quarter t, ai and
λt are the MP and time ﬁxed eﬀects (FE), and Dit is an indicator for whether the
treatment is present in quarter t for individual i. We also cluster standard errors
on MPs to correct for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation (Bertrand, Duﬂo,
and Mullainathan 2004).
    When data on the same individuals are available over time, the treatment
itself may not be randomly assigned, i.e. individuals with certain
  A two-sample t-test ﬁnds a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the mean levels of populism of PD/SC
   and M5S, at traditional levels: t (392) = 6:891; p = 0:000.
  We do not ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the mean share of populist term usage between
   members of PdL and UDC [t (105) = 0:480; p = 0:632].
  See Autor (2003), Stevenson and Wolfers (2006, 276–283), Besley and Burgess (2004).


                                   JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES                    13


characteristics can be more likely to receive the treatment. Still, the identifying
assumption for the FE model is that the treatment is only determined by individual ﬁxed eﬀect ai. We therefore assume that an MP’s choice to leave her
parliamentary group is determined only by her own individual, time invariant,
characteristics (see Pischke 2005, 12).18 In Appendix G, we provide further
background on the party, as well as a discussion of media accounts about
their departures from their party. Using individual-level panel data allows
for a non-random treatment, but it still requires that the treatment and
control groups exhibit parallel trends over time before the treatment
occurs. In a model with multiple treatment groups, providing a simple
visual inspection of parallel paths becomes unfeasible (see Pischke 2005, 7).
We, therefore, present a formal test in Appendix F which demonstrates the
presence of pre-treatment parallel trends.


Results
Does populist ideology predict simpler language in parliamentary
oral communication?
Does the populism level of an MP inﬂuence the complexity of her spoken
communication? Figure 2 (and a related table in Appendix D) displays the
regression estimates of the models described in Section 4. The ﬁrst model
includes a combined metric of individual-level populism, while the second
model estimates the eﬀect of its two components, people-centrism and
anti-elitism, on language complexity. The results conform with our expectations on the eﬀect of populist ideology on speech readability of MPs. We
ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant positive eﬀect of the combined populism variable. Substantively speaking, a shift from no populist term usage to the
maximum observed frequency of populist language relates to an average
increase of the G-index, from 42.9 to 50.5. To provide substantive context
to this result, text with a G-index score below 40 is understood as being
diﬃcult for a secondary school reading level (ages 14-18), while texts with a
readability score below 60 are diﬃcult for a junior secondary school reading
level (ages 11–13). We also ﬁnd positive and statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects
for the components of populism, people-centrism and anti-elitism, on
language readability.19 The substantive eﬀects of these components are
roughly equivalent in size. A minimum to maximum shift in anti-elitist and
people-centric term usage corresponds roughly to an expected 4.5 points
increase on the readability scale, while holding all other variables constant.
  Notwithstanding the notorious habit of the M5S of banning members who explicitly disagree with the
   party leaders, the assumption seems reasonable here, given that all the observed moves were voluntary.
  We ﬁnd similar results in unreported models that control for the logarithmic transformation of the populism, people-centrism, and anti-elitism variables.


14       S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


Figure 2. Explaining spoken language readability in the current Italian Parliament. This
ﬁgure displays linear regression estimates for the eﬀect of populist ideology (combined,
people-centric, and anti-elitist), party aﬃliation, and demographic characteristics on the
readability of a given MP’s plenary speeches in the 17th Italian Legislature. Regression
coeﬃcients and conﬁdence intervals [90%, 95%, 99%] are displayed for the combined
populism model (top, blue, circle) and component model (bottom, red, diamond). Standard errors are clustered by MP. See Appendix D for a table of these results.


   Party membership also seems to be relevant in shaping the complexity of
an MP’s spoken communication, independently from her use of populist
terms. In the combined populism model, we ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant
positive eﬀect of membership in the allegedly populist groups of LN and
M5S, and in the mixed parliamentary group (MISTO). When estimating the
components model, we ﬁnd a similar eﬀect: membership in the populist
LN, M5S, and MISTO remain positively and statistically signiﬁcantly related
with plenary speech readability when compared to SC aﬃliation. Lastly,
among the demographic controls, only age displays a statistically signiﬁcant
eﬀect, with older MPs being more likely to use a simpler language when
speaking in parliament.
   The signiﬁcant and substantive eﬀects of individual-level populist language
usage as well as populist party aﬃliation suggest that both individual and
party ideology matter in shaping the complexity of an MP’s plenary speech.
Populist politicians, and politicians who are member of populist parties,
employ a simpler rhetoric with respect to their mainstream colleagues.


                                   JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES                   15


Does party membership inﬂuence MPs’ language?
The signiﬁcant party eﬀects found in our regression analysis suggest that
party membership matters in shaping the complexity of an MP’s plenary
speech. In this section, we exploit changes in party allegiances by Italian
MPs to further estimate the causal impact of party membership on language
usage. Table 2 shows the results for MPs moving, respectively, from M5s and
PdL. In the M5S case, the treatment has a statistically signiﬁcant negative
eﬀect on spoken language readability. Moving from M5S to a mainstream parliamentary group (either PD or SC) produces an expected decrease of 3.2
points in the G-Index of readability of an MP, independently from her ideology
(mean in the sample 46.4 points, range 63 points). Conversely, moving from
PdL to UDC does not have a statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect on readability. We
thus ﬁnd evidence of party membership eﬀects only in one of the two analysed cases. We do not observe signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the treatment
eﬀects after controlling for, potentially time-variant, individual-level populism
(see Appendix E).
   We observe a signiﬁcant shift in language complexity only for MPs moving
from M5S to PD/SC. We argue that this mixed evidence is not produced by
idiosyncratic characteristics of the M5S, but by the structurally diﬀerent treatments involved. As we point out in Section 4.2, although both M5S and PdL
are categorized as populist parties, their degree of populism is diﬀerent.
MPs who move from PdL to UDC do not signiﬁcantly change their communication behaviour, therefore, because the change in party ideology to which
they are subject is not substantively meaningful. Here we stress the importance of considering the fact that political parties’ ideology can exhibit
diﬀerent degrees of populism. While political parties are usually categorized
as either populist or mainstream, our analysis shows that the populist ideology should not be reduced to a dichotomous variable. A few authors have


Table 2. Time and entity FE estimates.
                                                       (a)                                       (b)
                                                   M5S → PD/SC                               PdL → UDC
Treatment eﬀect (DiD)                                −3.177**                                   0.612
                                                      (1.101)                                  (2.129)
MP ﬁxed eﬀects                                          Yes                                      Yes
Time ﬁxed eﬀects                                        Yes                                      Yes
N                                                       629                                      654
Treated units                                             5                                       19
Control units                                            73                                       53
Note: This table displays the results of DiD models which estimate the eﬀect of joining a mainstream parliamentary group from a populist group on plenary oral language readability. Column (a) displays the
   results of a move from M5S to PD or SC. Column (b) shows the results of a switch from PdL to UDC.
   Robust standard errors in parenthesis are clustered by MP.
Standard errors in parentheses.
+
  p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.


16      S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


already moved in this direction. Relevant examples include Akkerman, Mudde,
and Zaslove (2014), that evaluate voters’ populist attitudes on a Likert Scale,
and Caiani and Graziano (2016), who outline the presence of certain “varieties
of populism” in their content analysis of Euromanifestos. Our study further
conﬁrms the suitability of continuous measures of populism over dichotomous classiﬁcations of populist versus mainstream parties.


Discussion
Our analysis has relevant implications for the literature on populism and political communication, legislative behaviour, and electoral competition. While
previous studies have mainly produced anecdotal accounts of populists’ plainspoken language, our study oﬀers comprehensive empirical evidence of a
connection between populist ideology and language complexity. Our
regression analysis shows that populist politicians, and members of populist
parties, communicate using simpler language than their mainstream colleagues. These results speak to a general debate on political populism and
communication. There is scholarly disagreement on whether populism
should be deﬁned as an ideology (Mudde 2004) or as a discursive strategy
(Bonikowski and Gidron 2016), while others argue that ideology determines
the rhetorical style of populist parties (Jagers and Walgrave 2007). We build
on Jagers and Walgrave (2007)’s conception, arguing that the usage of populist terms by a political actor is determined by her populist ideology. Our
central conclusion, though, is that populist rhetoric is not only characterized
by the use of “populist terms”, but also by the intrinsic simplicity of the
language employed. In other words, language simplicity can be thought of
as a feature of populist political communication.
    Our diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences analysis further corroborates the hypothesis
that party membership plays a role in inﬂuencing legislators’ communication
behaviour. When MPs leave a populist parliamentary group to join a mainstream one, the complexity of their language increases. This empirical evidence oﬀers new insights on the extent of party membership’s inﬂuence
over legislators’ behaviour and we hereby provide some viable explanations
for our results.
    A ﬁrst possible interpretation of our results concerns the process of learning and commitment to legislative norms. Common wisdom in the study of
legislative norms states that when newcomers enter a legislative body they
learn the relevant norms through a process of socialization with veteran
members (Asher 1973; Bowler, Farrell, and Katz 1999). A similar process
could be in place when switchers modify their speech style to match that
of their colleagues. When an MP enters a populist party, she encounters
shared “norms of communication”, which prescribe that members use a
simple language, and which thus lead the newcomer to adapt her


                          JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES   17


communication style to comply with the existing norms. This suggests that
the process of socialization through which legislators learn shared norms of
conduct could be relevant not only when studying phenomena like apprenticeship or legislative work, but also when studying political communication.
   A second viable explanation of our results involves party leaders’ action in
parliament. Scholars have already provided evidence that, in addition to
inﬂuencing legislators voting behaviour, party elites regulate the debate
agenda in parliaments to convey an image of a cohesive and uniﬁed party
(Giannetti and Pedrazzani 2016; Harris 2005; Maltzman and Sigelman 1996;
Morris 2001; Proksch and Slapin 2012, 2015). Similarly, populist party
leaders could opt for pre-approving speeches to make sure that their
content is simple enough to comply with their populist party’s ideology
and electoral strategy. A plain speech style would then appear to be the
most appropriate stylistic choice to express a pre-approved simple content.
Our results show that the relationship between party membership and communication behaviour is worth studying. Future work should further investigate the causal mechanisms that we propose, for example by studying
socialization dynamics within a party, or propose further viable mechanisms.
   Lastly, our analysis speaks to a more general point on the relative eﬀectiveness of populist actors in attracting electoral support. Recent scholarship has demonstrated that individuals are better able to estimate the
ideological positions of parties who present their campaign messaging
with a simpler language. When studying electoral manifestos in Austria
and Germany, Bischof and Senninger (2017) ﬁnd that individuals are
better able to grasp the ideological positions of parties that present their
campaign messaging using a simpler language. Bos, Van Der Brug, and
De Vreese (2013) ﬁnd evidence of a positive eﬀect of populist communication style on the perceived legitimacy of right-wing populist party
leaders among lower educated and politically cynical Dutch voters. When
analysing legislative speeches in the German Bundestag, Lin and Osnabrügge (2018) show that MPs increase the comprehensibility of their rhetoric
to facilitate a more eﬀective communication. There appears to be consistent empirical evidence, at least among European countries, that a straightforward language, used to oﬀer simple solutions to complex issues, can
eﬀectively inﬂuence public opinion and capture the emotions of discontented voters. In the age of social media and a maximum limit of 280 characters per Tweet, therefore, a simple political communication style might
constitute a competitive advantage in the contemporary marketplace of
ideas. While mainstream policy solutions are indeed more complex than
the opportunistic positions held by populist politicians, mainstream actors
should strive to deliver their ideas in a more straightforward manner
when communicating with the electorate.


18       S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.


Notes on contributors
Silvia Decadri is a PhD Candidate and IRC Scholar in the Political Science Department of
Trinity College Dublin. In her thesis, she employs computational text analytic methods
to study the causes of legislative particularism. She holds a BA in Political Science from
Universita’ degli Studi di Milano and an MSc in Economics from Universita’ Cattolica del
Sacro Cuore. She has worked as a research analyst, both in the public and in the private
sector. Her main research interests include legislative behavior, party politics, political
communication and computational methods.
Constantine Boussalis is Assistant Professor of Political Science at Trinity College
Dublin. Much of his current work examines the various facets of climate change communication with the help of computational and automated text-analytic methods. His
work has appeared in Global Environmental Change, Regulation & Governance, Social
Science & Medicine, Journal of Development Studies, Development Policy Review, and
the Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition.


ORCID
Silvia Decadri   http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0378-1183


References
Adcock, R., and D. Collier. 2001. “Measurement Validity: A Shared Standard for
   Qualitative and Quantitative Research.” American Political Science Review 95 (3):
   529–546.
Akkerman, A., C. Mudde, and A. Zaslove. 2014. “How Populist are the People?
   Measuring Populist Attitudes in Voters.” Comparative Political Studies 47 (9): 1324–
   1353.
Albertazzi, D., and D. McDonnell. 2007. Twenty First Century Populism. New York:
   Palgrave Macmillan.
Asher, H. B. 1973. “The Learning of Legislative Norms.” American Political Science Review
   67 (2): 499–513.
Autor, D. H. 2003. “Outsourcing at Will: The Contribution of Unjust Dismissal Doctrine to
   the Growth of Employment Outsourcing.” Journal of Labor Economics 21 (1): 1–42.
Benoit, K., K. Watanabe, P. Nulty, A. Obeng, H. Wang, B. Lauderdale, and W. Lowe. 2017.
   Quanteda: Quantitative Analysis of Textual Data [Computer Software Manual].
Bertrand, M., E. Duﬂo, and S. Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
   Diﬀerences-in-Diﬀerences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1):
   249–275.
Besley, T., and R. Burgess. 2004. “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic Performance?
   Evidence from India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1): 91–134.
Bigi, A. 2013. “Viral Political Communication and Readability: An Analysis of an Italian
   Political Blog.” Journal of Public Aﬀairs 13 (2): 209–217.


                              JOURNAL OF ELECTIONS, PUBLIC OPINION AND PARTIES           19


Bischof, D., and R. Senninger. 2017. “Simple Politics for the People? Complexity in
   Campaign Messages and Political Knowledge.” European Journal of Political
   Research. 57 (2): 473–495.
Bonikowski, B., and N. Gidron. 2016. “Multiple Traditions in Populism Research: Toward
   a Theoretical Synthesis.” APSA Comparative Politics Newsletter 26 (12): 7–14.
Bordignon, F., and L. Ceccarini. 2013. “Five Stars and a Cricket. Beppe Grillo Shakes
   Italian Politics. ” South European Society and Politics 18 (4): 427–449.
Bos, L., W. Van Der Brug, and C. H. De Vreese. 2013. “An Experimental Test of the Impact
   of Style and Rhetoric on the Perception of Right-wing Populist and Mainstream Party
   Leaders.” Acta Politica 48 (2): 192–208.
Bowler, S., D. M. Farrell, and R. S. Katz. 1999. Party Discipline and Parliamentary
   Government. Columbus: The Ohio State University Press.
Brosius, A., B. Bakker, M. Schoonvelde, and G. Schumacher. 2017. “Evaluating
   Complexity in Political Speech.” The Euengage working paper series.
Caiani, M., and P. R. Graziano. 2016. “Varieties of Populism: Insights from the Italian
   Case.” Italian Political Science Review/Rivista Italiana di Scienza Politica 46 (2): 243–
   267.
Davies, P. 2012. The National front in France: Ideology, Discourse and Power. London:
   Routledge.
Degani, M. 2016. “Endangered Intellect: A Case Study of Clinton vs Trump Campaign
   Discourse.” Rivista semestrale ISSN 2281, 4582.
Dell’Orletta, F., S. Montemagni, and G. Venturi. 2011. “Read-it: Assessing Readability of
   Italian Texts with a View to Text Simpliﬁcation.” Proceedings of the second workshop
   on speech and language processing for assistive technologies. Association for
   Computational Linguistics (pp. 73–83).
Dramnescu, M. 2014. “Communication. Political Speech. Populist Speech.” Topical
   Communication Uncertainties 242–256.
Fella, S., and C. Ruzza. 2013. “Populism and the Fall of the Centre-right in Italy: The End
   of the Berlusconi Model or a New Beginning?” Journal of Contemporary European
   Studies 21 (1): 38–52.
Franchina, V., and R. Vacca. 1986. “Adaptation of Flesh Readability Index on a Bilingual
   Text Written by the Same Author Both in Italian and English Languages.” Linguaggi 3:
   47–49.
Giannetti, D., and A. Pedrazzani. 2016. “Rules and Speeches: How Parliamentary Rules
   Aﬀect Legislators’ Speech-making Behavior.” Legislative Studies Quarterly 41 (3):
   771–800.
Gini, G., T. Pozzoli, F. Borghi, and L. Franzoni. 2008. “The Role of Bystanders in Students’
   Perception of Bullying and Sense of Safety.” Journal of school psychology 46 (6):
   617–638.
Grimmer, J. 2010. “A Bayesian Hierarchical Topic Model for Political Texts: Measuring
   Ex-pressed Agendas in Senate Press Releases.” Political Analysis 18: 1–35.
Grimmer, J., and B. M. Stewart. 2013. “Text as Data: The Promise and Pitfalls of
   Automatic Content Analysis Methods for Political Texts.” Political Analysis 21 (3):
   267–297.
Harris, D. B. 2005. “Orchestrating Party Talk: A Party-based View of One-Minute
   Speeches in the House of Representatives.” Legislative Studies Quarterly 30 (1):
   127–141.
Haselmayer, M., M. Wagner, and T. M. Meyer. 2017. “Partisan Bias in Message Selection:
   Media Gatekeeping of Party Press Releases.” Political Communication 34 (3):
   367–384.


20       S. DECADRI AND C. BOUSSALIS


Jagers, J., and S. Walgrave. 2007. “Populism as Political Communication Style: An
   Empirical Study of Political Parties’ Discourse in Belgium.” European Journal of
   Political Research 46 (3): 319–345.
Krehbiel, K. 1993. “Where’s the Party?” British Journal of Political Science 23 (2): 235–266.
Kriesi, H., R. Lachat, P. Selb, S. Bornschier, and M. Helbling. 2005. Der aufstieg der svp:
   Acht kantone im vergleich. Zurich: NZZ Verlag.
Lin, N., and M. Osnabrügge. 2018. “Making Comprehensible Speeches When Your
   Constituents Need it.” Research & Politics 5 (3): 2053168018795598. doi:10.1177/
   2053168018795598.
Lucisano, P., and M. E. Piemontese. 1988. “Gulpease: una formula per la predizione della
   diﬃcolta’ dei testi in lingua italiana.” Scuola e citta 3 (31): 110–124.
Maltzman, F., and L. Sigelman. 1996. “The Politics of Talk: Unconstrained Floor Time in
   the us House of Representatives.” The Journal of Politics 58 (3): 819–830.
McCarty, N. 2001. “The Hunt for Party Discipline in Congress.” American Political Science
   Review 95 (3): 673–687.
Morris, J. S. 2001. “Reexamining the Politics of Talk: Partisan Rhetoric in the 104th
   House.” Legislative Studies Quarterly 26: 101–121.
Mudde, C. 2004. “The Populist Zeitgeist.” Government and Opposition 39 (4): 542–563.
Nokken, T. P. 2000. “Dynamics of Congressional Loyalty: Party Defection and Roll-call
   Behavior, 1947–97.” Legislative Studies Quarterly 25: 417–444.
Pauwels, T. 2011. “Measuring Populism: A Quantitative Text Analysis of Party Literature
   in Belgium.” Journal of Elections Public Opinion and Parties 21 (1): 97–119.
Pischke, J. 2005. “Empirical Methods in Applied Economics: Lecture Notes.”
   Downloaded July 24, 2015.
Proksch, S.-O., and J. B. Slapin. 2012. “Institutional Foundations of Legislative Speech.”
   American Journal of Political Science 56 (3): 520–537.
Proksch, S. O., and J. B. Slapin. 2015. The Politics of Parliamentary Debate. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Rooduijn, M. 2014. “The Nucleus of Populism: In Search of the Lowest Common
   Denominator.” Government and Opposition 49 (4): 573–599.
Rooduijn, M., and T. Pauwels. 2011. “Measuring Populism: Comparing Two Methods of
   Content Analysis.” West European Politics 34 (6): 1272–1283.
Rosenthal, H., and E. Voeten. 2004. “Analyzing Roll Calls with Perfect Spatial Voting:
   France 1946–1958.” American Journal of Political Science 48 (3): 620–632.
Sagarzazu, I., and H. Klüver. 2017. “Coalition Governments and Party Competition:
   Political Communication Strategies of Coalition Parties.” Political Science Research
   and Methods 5 (2): 333–349.
Schumacher, E., and M. Eskenazi. 2016. “A Readability Analysis of Campaign Speeches
   from the 2016 us Presidential Campaign.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.05739.
Spirling, A. 2016. “Democratization and Linguistic Complexity: The Eﬀect of Franchise
   Extension on Parliamentary Discourse, 1832–1915.” The Journal of Politics 78 (1):
   120–136.
Stevenson, B., and J. Wolfers. 2006. “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Divorce Laws
   and Family Distress.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1): 267–288.
Tarchi, M. 2003. L’Italia populista: dal qualunquismo ai girotondi. 147 vols. Bologna: Il
   mulino.
Wagner, M., and T. M. Meyer. 2014. “Which Issues do Parties Emphasise? Salience
   Strategies and Party Organisation in Multiparty Systems.” West European Politics
   37 (5): 1019–1045.