ECONtribute
Discussion Paper No. 029


    Hate Trumps Love: The Impact of Political
    Polarization on Social Preferences


                                             Eugen Dimant


September 2020                                                                                 www.econtribute.de


                 Funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under
                     Germany´s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2126/1– 390838866 is gratefully acknowledged.


The most recent public version of the working paper can always be downloaded following this link.


                     Hate Trumps Love:
   The Impact of Political Polarization on Social Preferences
                                           Eugen Dimanta,b,c
                                       a
                                        University of Pennsylvania
                                             b
                                               CESifo, Munich
                                        c
                                          Identity and Conflict Lab


Abstract
Political polarization has ruptured the fabric of U.S. society. The focus of this paper is
to examine various layers of (non-)strategic decision-making that are plausibly a↵ected
by political polarization through the lens of one’s feelings of hate and love for Donald J.
Trump. In several pre-registered experiments, I document the behavioral-, belief-, and
norm-based mechanisms through which perceptions of interpersonal closeness, altruism,
and cooperativeness are a↵ected by polarization, both within and between political factions.
To separate ingroup-love from outgroup-hate, the political setting is contrasted with a
minimal group setting. I find strong heterogeneous e↵ects: ingroup-love occurs in the
perceptional domain (how close one feels towards others), whereas outgroup-hate occurs
in the behavioral domain (how one helps/harms/cooperates with others). In addition,
the pernicious outcomes of partisan identity also comport with the elicited social norms.
Noteworthy, the rich experimental setting also allows me to examine the drivers of these
behaviors, suggesting that the observed partisan rift might be not as forlorn as previously
suggested: in the contexts studied here, the adverse behavioral impact of the resulting
intergroup conflict can be attributed to one’s grim expectations about the cooperativeness
of the opposing faction, as opposed to one’s actual unwillingness to cooperate with them.

Keywords: Identity, Norms, Political Polarization, Social Preferences, Trump
JEL: B41, D01, D9

   ⇤
     I am indebted to Simon Gächter, Daniele Nosenzo, and Silvia Sonderegger for their input on the initial
project idea. This work has also benefited from conversations with Abraham Aldama, Danny Choi, Guy
Grossman, Felix Kölle, Je↵ Lees, Matthew Levendusky, Brendan Nyhan, Kyle Peyton, Nicholas Sambanis,
and Sean Westwood. The three-part data collection and analyses were pre-registered at AsPredicted.org
#42538, #42539, and #42540 entitled ‘Hate Trumps Love’. I acknowledge financial support from the
German Research Foundation (DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy — EXC 2126/1– 390838866.
     Email address: edimant@sas.upenn.edu (Eugen Dimant)


                                                                           This version: September 8, 2020


1. Introduction

       Rising political polarization coincides with and is often linked to fractured societies rife
with racial inequality, factional conflict, and partisan animosity (Dixit and Weibull, 2007;
Fiorina and Abrams, 2008; Iyengar and Westwood, 2015; Bénabou and Tirole, 2016; Reich,
2017; Autor et al., 2020; Graham and Svolik, 2020). At its core, polarization undermines
social contracts that are necessary for a functioning society: it restrains social interactions
across polarized clusters, impedes cooperativeness, trust, and altruism between political
factions, and thus poses a credible threat to democratic values.1 This is further amplified
by false polarization, the perception of more polarization with respect to policy issues than
actually exists (Levendusky and Malhotra, 2016; Flynn et al., 2017; Moore-Berg et al.,
2020). In both strategic and non-strategic decision contexts that capture cooperativeness, altruism, and anti-social behavior, I examine the behavioral-, belief-, and norm-based
mechanisms with which this political intergroup conflict materializes.
       Understanding how political polarization may a↵ect one’s willingness to engage in altruistic behavior and the collective provision of goods within and between factions has
direct social welfare implications (Henrich et al., 2001; Fehr and Fischbacher, 2003; Bowles
and Gintis, 2013). Arguably, not all consequences of political polarization are created equal
and can be tackled with the same policies, thus warranting the trifecta approach – as put
forward in this study – of measuring beliefs, behaviors, and attitudes separately.
       On a theoretical level, the aggregate social consequences of polarization are unclear.
For one, polarization (and the resulting hostile climate) can produce enough outgroup animosity to reduce individual willingness to support and cooperate with members of the
opposite faction. For another, it may also – or instead – increase intra-faction cooperation; for instance, by promoting a sense of shared identity. To assess the social impact of
polarization, it is thus important to compare within- and between-group behaviors in a polarized environment that enables both strategic and non-strategic considerations. I attempt
to quantify this phenomenon through the lens of multiple controlled online experiments.
       Here, I focus on two layers of decision-making within and across political factions.
The first is behavioral: how does polarization in the context of political identities a↵ect
    Recent examples even include the opaque partisan divide over wearing face masks as a preventative measure against COVID-19 infections: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/17/upshot/coronavirusface-mask-map.html. See also Bhanot and Hopkins (2020).
pro-/anti-social decisions, cooperation, and social expectations in both strategic and nonstrategic environments? Do these take shape in form of ingroup-love, outgroup-hate, or
both simultaneously? Humans are known to bond over common identity markers (often
exemplified by one’s preference for something or someone), the study of which has its
origins in social science in the form of ingroup-outgroup favoritism and social identity
considerations (Tajfel and Turner, 1979; Alesina et al., 1999; Akerlof and Kranton, 2000;
Bernhard et al., 2006; E↵erson et al., 2008; Halevy et al., 2008). Although partisanship
is found to exacerbate cross-faction discrimination, prior work has often attributed this
behavior to a mix of ingroup-love and outgroup-hate by pitting one group against another.2
    The second is perceptional: are these behavioral di↵erences consistent with the observed
variations in perceived interpersonal closeness and social norms and thus help to explain
why we observe these di↵erences within and between political factions?
    My investigative approach is consistent with and speaks to the growing discussion
on a↵ective polarization – the animosity between and distrust towards members of the
opposing faction (Druckman and Levendusky, 2019; Iyengar et al., 2019). Donald Trump
is a polarizing figure and the current symbol of the Republican party (Jacobson, 2019),
which is captured by the novel measures that I put forward here. By comparing settings
with political identities to those with minimal group identities, I also contribute to the
aforementioned groupy behavior (Kranton and Sanders, 2017) literature in that the impact
of partisan animosity on ingroup-love and outgroup-hate can be examined separately.
    Across these three settings (non-strategic decisions, strategic decisions, norm perceptions), I collect and analyze experimental data from a diverse set of almost 3,000 individuals. The results show that these are not necessarily two sides of the same coin and that
depending on the decision environment, ingroup-love and outgroup-hate can co-exist independently from each other. More specifically, across several pre-registered experiments, I
approach this research question from three angles, which allows me to disentangle the role
of beliefs and preferences: First, I examine the impact of polarization in a non-strategic
context by borrowing from the existing literature that has studied pro- and anti-social
behavior through the lens of the extended dictator game (e.g., List, 2007; Bardsley, 2008;
Dimant, 2019), to which I will refer to as the Take-or-Give (T-o-G) Dictator Game. One
crucial feature of this game is that, in addition to being able to give money to the recipiGreene, 1999; Abramowitz and Saunders, 2006; Mason, 2015; Michelitch, 2015; Orr and Huber, 2020;
West and Iyengar, 2020. See also Yamagishi and Mifune, 2009; Amira et al., 2019; Iyengar et al., 2019.
ent, participants can exhibit anti-social behavior by taking money from the recipient. By
employing a context in which strategic motives are eliminated by design, the experiment
reveals how one’s identity shapes altruistic preferences with ingroups and outgroups.
    Second, I examine the impact of polarization in a strategic context by borrowing from
the “Attitudes-Beliefs-Contributions (ABC) of cooperation” approach by Gächter et al.
(2017). This method is nested in three variants of a public goods game: a one-shot sequential public goods game played with the strategy method to measure attitudes of cooperation, a belief-elicitation task to measure expectations of others’ cooperation, and a one-shot
simultaneous public goods game played with the direct response method to measure e↵ective contributions. This approach allows me to answer a few important and policy-relevant
questions: does the negative impact of polarization arise because people expect individuals
from the opposite faction to be less cooperative (a belief channel)? Or is it the consequence
of a lower willingness to cooperate with members of the opposite faction, no matter how
cooperative they are (a preference channel)? Distinguishing these mechanisms is vital because it allow us to identify whether a society is truly fractured across factions or whether,
in principle, cooperation might be sustained through appropriate belief management.
    Third, I employ the social norm elicitation procedure by Krupka and Weber (2013)
to examine the extent to which the observed behavioral di↵erences driven by political
polarization can be mapped onto the social norm perceptions within and between factions.
    I introduce disparate feelings of polarization by using a participant’s repugnance against
(henceforth referred to as hate) or relish for (henceforth referred to as love) the 45th
president: Donald J. Trump. This is a particularly expedient setting since Trump’s actions
during his 2016 presidency have been linked to increased social divergence and hate-related
consequences.3 To tease out the role of the emotional state that is produced by the partisan
divide, I also run the same experimental conditions with a separate set of participants using
the minimal group prime (following Chen and Li, 2009), where one’s preferences for Klee
or Kandinsky paintings are the identity markers, instead of one’s opinion about Trump.
    The results highlight that partisan animosity evokes an emotionally charged state that
a↵ects social preferences, beliefs, and attitudes of both a strategic and non-strategic nature
      See, e.g., Abramowitz and Webster, 2018; Mason, 2018; Müller and Schwarz, 2019; Klein, 2020. The
consequences of hate are conspicuous and often erupt in form of social movements and protests (Meyer,
2004; Madestam et al., 2013; Mazumder, 2018; Cantoni et al., 2019). In other contexts, the dating app
‘Hater’, backed by Mark Cuban, has utilized joint hate as a social glue to facilitate love connections (with
self-reported success) by matching people based on their joint hate, from food to lifestyle choices.
in di↵erent ways. In particular, by comparing the results between the Trump prime and
minimal group prime treatments, I find that ingroup-love only occurs in the context of how
one perceives interpersonal closeness to others; conversely, outgroup-hate is manifested in
one’s reduced altruism and cooperativeness with the opposing faction, as well as in the
form of pessimistic beliefs about the opposing faction’s cooperativeness. This confirms
that the results are not driven by ingroup-outgroup considerations alone, but that the
observed disparities in perceptions, beliefs, and own cooperativeness instead largely rest
on the emotional state that is evoked by political polarization. Connecting this to insights
from the norm-elicitation experiment, the scientific contribution and main takeaway is that
partisan identity not only drives costly social behavior, in part due to gloomy beliefs, but
it also comports with social norms that people suspect to exist.
   From a policy perspective, these findings contribute to the a↵ective polarization insights: correcting misguided beliefs can help to avoid harmful spillovers and intergroup
animosities, bridge the ‘dehumanization’ divide – the misconception of how negatively we
think others see us – and also address negativity bias, one’s inaccurate first- and secondorder beliefs about the outgroup’s behaviors, intentions, and perception of us (Levendusky
and Malhotra, 2016; Flynn et al., 2017; Lees and Cikara, 2020; Moore-Berg et al., 2020).
This is particularly important since people are found to preferentially consume and engage
with information that aligns with their prior beliefs, which can aggravate the partisan rift
(Dorison et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2019; Schwalbe et al., 2020, but see also Becker et al.,
2019). My results also connect to the findings by Lelkes and Westwood (2017): while they
find (asymmetric) partisan bias that is consistent with my results, they find very little evidence for outgroup-hate in the context of discrimination (see also Westwood et al., 2019).
The key di↵erences are the contexts in which I employ incentive-compatible behavioral
experiments, suggesting that a nuanced perspective of intergroup conflict is warranted.
   Against this backdrop, while my findings indicate that the impact of political polarization can be picked up across all studied (perceptional and behavioral) measures, the results
emphasize the nuanced composition of political polarization: the partisan rift might be not
as forlorn as previously suggested. In the contexts studied here, the adverse behavioral
impact of intergroup conflict can be attributed to one’s grim expectations about the cooperativeness of the opposing faction, rather than one’s actual unwillingness to cooperate with
others. With that, my paper speaks to the e↵ects of polarization and helps to understand
how behavior has changed in response to it, providing evidence for how exacerbated the
intergroup animosities are under the 45th presidency (Druckman and Levendusky, 2019).
       Section 2 (Section 3) details Experiment 1 (Experiment 2), in which the research question is examined in a non-strategic (strategic) context. Section 4 presents Experiment 3,
which contains the results from the norm elicitation for both contexts. Section 5 concludes.


2. Experiment 1: Hate and Love in a Non-Strategic Context

2.1. Data Collection and Experimental Design
       In this experiment (same as in Experiment 2, see Section 3), data is collected without
the use of deception for two types of primes using a between-subject design: the Trump
prime (TP) and the Minimal Group Paradigm (MGP) prime. In TP, participants are asked
to state their love/hate opinion about Trump after seeing a picture of Trump wearing a
MAGA hat.4 Participants are then randomized into one of three conditions that vary
by the type information that they receive about their randomly assigned partner. That
is, participants randomly observed that their matched partner either loved Trump, hated
Trump, or had an undisclosed Trump opinion.
       In MGP, participants also start by seeing the same picture of and stating their opinion about Trump. Immediately afterwards they are presented with Klee and Kandinsky
paintings, asked to choose which they prefer, and these preferences – not their Trump
opinion – are then used in the subsequent matching. That is, participants randomly observed that their matched partner either preferred Klee, Kandinsky, or had an undisclosed
painting preference, while not knowing that partner’s Trump preference.5 This procedure
allows me to keep the role of the Trump prime constant across treatments and focus on
the sole e↵ect of being matched according to one’s (mis)matched Trump or painting preferences. Thus, conditional on their own Trump opinion/painting preference, participants
were allocated to one of the partner preferences conditions at random. Consequently, the
between-design captures the dimensions: 2 (prime) ⇥ 2 (own Trump/painting preference)
⇥ 3 (partner’s preference). Figure 1 illustrates the experimental design.
       In sum, this variant of the Dictator Game allows me to take the first step towards
investigating the impact of political polarization on altruism, which – unlike regular DicAs per pre-registration (https://aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=wt9tg3), only participants who indicated
to either hate or love Trump are analyzed, whereas participants who were indi↵erent are not analyzed. My
reasoning for this is to align the analysis with the research question and focus on the role of polarization.
This renders the indi↵erent participants (that MTurk cannot screen out ahead of time) obsolete.
     Data for recipients was collected separately and none of those participants took part in any of the
experiments or performed any active tasks.
tator Games – also provides me with the opportunity to study both pro-social (giving)
and anti-social (taking) behavior simultaneously. Moreover, the contrast with the minimal
group prime adds an additional layer of detail in that I am able to distinguish whether the
observed behavior with the political prime resembles ingroup-love, outgroup-hate, or both.
       Note that, however, the condition in which the partner’s opinion about Trump or
preference for paintings is not revealed to the participant are relegated to the Online
Appendix. I do this for two reasons: for one, the hate-love analysis is the main focus of
this paper whereas the unknown opinion/preference condition is a robustness check. For
another, as expected, both perceived closeness with and behavior towards a person with
an undisclosed Trump/paintings preference fall right in between the results presented here.
       Data from 810 participants6 in the role of dictators have been collected for the conditions analyzed in the main text.7 After dropping unusable data, data for 801 dictators is
analyzed.8 The design of this experiment is straightforward and consisted of two stages
(details for all stages were announced sequentially): a belief elicitation stage (divided into
two parts) followed by a take-or-give Dictator Game. The experiment lasted 10 minutes and dictators earned an average of $4 (including a show-up payment of $0.25). This
translates to an hourly wage of $24 and is well above average on MTurk (Hara et al., 2018).


Stage I: Preference Elicitation
For the Trump Prime (TP) treatments, this stage was subdivided into two elicitations:
one’s opinion about Trump and one’s perceived towards the matched partner.
   1. In the first elicitation, participants were presented with a photo of Donald J. Trump
         and had to rate how they personally feel about him (with a focus on the time since
     Since MTurk is known to be liberal-leaning, I over-sampled in order to collect enough data for the
Trump lovers. As correctly anticipated, those who indicated to love Trump appeared in the data about
3
  of the time. I calibrate the required sample size to obtain high statistical power based on a classroom
pre-test that yielded an e↵ect size of 0.54. Consequently, the power calculations yielded that 50 participants
per cell are needed in order to achieve 80% at an alpha of 0.05. To ensure high quality data collection on
MTurk, I utilized a combination of CAPTCHAs and screening questions to avoid pool contamination. I
applied the following restrictions to the participant pool: U.S.-based, approval rate greater than 95%, and
could participate only once in any of the three experiments presented in this paper. This corresponds to
the recommended best practices to maximize data quality (Buhrmester et al., 2018).
     Data from participants in conditions that are not analyzed here are presented in the Online Appendix.
     Consistent with the pre-registered rules to identify unusable data (failure to pass attention checks,
manipulation checks, and/or comprehension checks), Dictator Game data from a total of 18 participants is
dropped from the analysis. The appearance of removed participants is uncorrelated with the treatments,
and the presented results are not sensitive to the inclusion of these participants (available upon request).
                 Trump Prime (TP)                                           Minimal Group Paradigm (MGP)
                    Treatments                                                       Treatments
             Stage I: Preference Elicitations                                      Stage I: Preference Elicitations

   1    Preference for Trump                                            1      Preference for Trump
        Participants are presented with a photo of Donald J.                   Same as in TP treatment.
        Trump wearing a ‘MAGA’ hat and are asked to rate
        their opinion about him from extreme hate to                    2      Preference for Paintings
        extreme love.                                                          Participants are presented with Klee and
                                                                               Kandinsky paintings and are asked to
                                                                               indicate which paintings they prefer.

   2     Closeness to matched partner                                   3      Closeness to matched partner
         ▪    Random matching with a partner who indicated                     ▪    Random matching with a partner who indicated
              to either hate Trump, love Trump, or whose                            to either prefer Klee or Kandinsky paintings, or
              opinion about Trump is not disclosed.                                 whose painting preferences are not disclosed.
         ▪    Participants were asked to indicate on the                       ▪    Participants were asked to indicate on the
              ‘Inclusion of Other in the Self’ (IOS) scale one of                   ‘Inclusion of Other in the Self’ (IOS) scale one of
              7 of circles (that range from just touching to                        7 of circles (that range from just touching to
              almost completely overlapping) how close they                         almost completely overlapping) how close they
              felt to their matched partner.                                        felt to their matched partner.


       Stage II: Take-or-Give Dictator Game                                  Stage II: Take-or-Give Dictator Game
                   Participants play a one-shot                                           Participants play a one-shot
       Take-or-Give version of the dictator game (List, 2007):                Take-or-Give version of the dictator game (List, 2007):

         Participants continue to be matched with the same                     Participants continue to be matched with the same
           partner. The matched partner’s opinion about                          partner. The matched partner’s preference for
               Trump is displayed in one of three ways:                            paintings is displayed in one of three ways:


        Disclosed           Undisclosed             Disclosed                Preferes Klee         Undisclosed         Prefers Kandinsky
       Trump Hater       Trump Preference          Trump Lover                                  Painting Preference


        Participants are assigned the role of a dictator, their                Participants are assigned the role of a dictator, their
          matched partner the role of a passive recipient.                       matched partner the role of a passive recipient.


            Dictators start with $10, recipients with $5.                          Dictators start with $10, recipients with $5.
         Dictators can give up to $5 of own endowment or                        Dictators can give up to $5 of own endowment or
                 take up to $5 from the recipient.                                      take up to $5 from the recipient.


Figure 1: Experimental design of the Take-or-Give Dictator Game for both the Trump Prime and the minimal
group prime conditions. Note that, for the purpose of brevity, the results for the conditions in which participants
were matched with a partner for whom the Trump/painting preference was not disclosed (indicated with a black
arrow in this figure) are relegated to the Online Appendix.
         he became president) on a 5-point Likert scale: extreme hate, moderate hate, indifferent, moderate love, or extreme love.9 This method is adapted from the ‘feelings
         thermometer’ in the American National Election Study (ANES).
   2. In the second elicitation, participants were randomly paired with another passive
         participant who indicated to either hate Trump (if they indicated either extreme
         or moderate hate), love Trump (if they indicated either extreme or love), or whose
         opinion about Trump was not disclosed. Participants were then asked to indicate
         on the ‘Inclusion of Other in the Self’ (IOS) scale one out of 7 of circles (ranging
         from just touching to almost completely overlapping) how close they felt to their
         matched partner (Aron et al., 1992; Gächter et al., 2015). In the analysis, this scale
         is converted to percentage (ratio of one’s indicated value out of 7).

       For the Minimal Group Paradigm (MGP) treatments, an additional elicitation stage
was included: after eliciting one’s opinion about Trump, participants were presented with
several paintings from either Klee or Kandinsky and were asked to choose their favorite
(design following Chen and Li, 2009). Subsequently, participants were matched with a
partner at random whose painting preferences were either disclosed or remained undisclosed. Thus, the matching procedure mirrors exactly the procedure in the TP treatments,
except that the matching and the subsequent IOS closeness elicitation were done on the
basis of painting preferences instead of Trump opinions.
       It is worth stressing why beginning both experiments, TP and MGP, with an elicitation
of participants’ opinion towards Trump is prudent, even if the matching of MGP does not
utilize their opinions about Trump. For one, doing so enables me to hold any residual e↵ect
of the thought about Trump constant across both treatments. For another, I can break
down and compare the data in both treatments by one’s own opinion of Trump, which is
a necessary comparison when studying ingroup-love/outgroup-hate.


Stage II: Take-or-Give Dictator Game
In order to capture both pro-social (giving) and anti-social (taking) behavior simultaneIn accordance with the pre-registration, answers for moderate and extreme hate (love) were subsumed
under ‘hate’ (‘love’) and were also done so in the matching procedure during the experiment. That is, in the
treatments in which the matched partner’s opinion about Trump was disclosed, participants only observed
whether the partner indicated to hate or love Trump, but not the strength (extreme or moderate hate/love)
of their opinion. Consequently, they will be treated as a bundled characteristic throughout the experiment.
For a full distribution of opinions, see Figure A.1 in the Main Appendix.
ously, I employ a variant of a dictator game that was inspired by existing research (List,
2007; Bardsley, 2008; Dimant, 2019). In this variant, both the dictator and the recipient
start with a non-zero endowment and the dictator’s action space is augmented with one
additional option: the opportunity to take some or all money away from the recipient.
One of the many advantages of using this modified version of the game is the ability to
measure both pro-social and anti-social tendencies simultaneously (see Dimant (2019) for
a discussion). Prior to making the decision, participants are told that – on top of the showup fee – half of all randomly determined dictator-recipient pairs would be paid a bonus
corresponding to their in-game decisions. The remainder half only receive the show-up fee.
    For the purpose of my study, I borrow the initial endowment structure from List (2007):
the dictator starts with $10 whereas the recipient starts with $5.10 The dictator makes one
of the following three decisions exactly once:
   1. Take up to $5 from the recipient’s endowment and add to one’s own endowment.
   2. Make no change to the initial distribution of money.
   3. Give out up to $5 from one’s own endowment and add to the recipient’s endowment.

2.2. Hypotheses
    First, existing literature on identity, ingroup bias, and social proximity suggests that
individuals will feel closer to participants who are more ‘similar’ to them, which will also
show up in form of stronger pro-sociality (e.g., Akerlof, 1997; Akerlof and Kranton, 2000;
Charness et al., 2007; Fowler and Kam, 2007; Chen and Li, 2009; Christ et al., 2014; Lees
and Cikara, 2020). Compared to being matched with someone whose opinion of Trump is
undisclosed, greater (lower) amount of pro-sociality and closeness towards a partner with
the same Trump opinion will be labeled as ingroup-love (outgroup-hate).11 Consequently:

H1 : Dictators will exhibit the largest closeness score and extent of pro-sociality towards a
partner who has the same opinion of Trump (TH-TH or TL-TL), lowest when the matched
partner’s opinion is misaligned (TH-TL or TL-TH).

    What is more, as argued in the introduction, a contribution of this paper is to examine
whether ‘hate’ is stronger than ‘love’. If so, one would expect a disproportional e↵ect for
      To retain incentive-compatibility, dictators were told that their allocation decisions are paid out in
50% of the time as bonus at the end of the experiment. If not selected, they only received the show-up fee.
     I follow Yamagishi and Mifune (2009) and define these terms as: Ingroup-love (outgroup-hate) indicates
behavior that provides ingroup (outgroup) members with preferential (spiteful) treatment.
both closeness and displayed behavior that explains a host of existing phenomena, including
asymmetries between positive and negative reciprocity as well as between the contagion of
pro-/anti-social behavior (O↵erman, 2002; Croson and Shang, 2008; Lelkes and Westwood,
2017; Dimant, 2019; Bicchieri et al., 2020).

H2 : Dictators will exhibit disproportionately larger outgroup hate than ingroup love.

2.3. Behavioral Results
    In what follows, results for both TP treatments and MGP treatments are presented in
the same Figure 2. Results will be broken up along multiple dimensions for both perception
of closeness (henceforth referred to as perception, for illustrative purposes presented as %
of indicated closeness on a scale from 1 to 7) and behavior in the T-o-G dictator game
(henceforth referred to as behavior, measured as % of dollar amount given to or taken away
from the recipient):12

    • When the dictator is matched with a partner who has an aligned opinion about Trump
      (matching corresponds either to Hate-Hate or Love-Love) compared to being matched
      with a partner who has a contrary opinion about Trump (matching corresponds
      either to Love-Hate or Hate-Love). Results are presented in Figure 2.
    • Same analysis, but broken down by a participant’s opinion on Trump (hate or love).
      Results are presented in Figure 3.13

    Comparing the perceived closeness and behavior between the Trump Prime treatments
(top panel of Figure 2) and the minimal group prime treatments (bottom panel of Figure
2) yields a number of interesting patterns. First, it is evident that di↵erences in both
closeness and behavior only arise in TP and not in MGP, indicating that an ingroupoutgroup di↵erentiation is evoked exclusively by the hate-love prime. Second, zooming
in on the actual di↵erences, one can observe that being matched with a partner with an
aligned opinion leads to stronger perceived closeness (78.1% vs. 39.8%, BSM, p<0.001) as
     Consistent with the pre-registration, the following statistical analyses will be performed in all three
experiments: bootstrap two-sample t-test method (BSM) approach as proposed by Mo↵att (2015) with
9999 replications. The BSM procedure retains cardinal information without distribution assumptions.
Robustness checks will be performed using non-parametric Mann Whitney-U ranksum tests. Unless noted
otherwise, the results can be assumed to be consistent between the two methods.
     For ease of exposition, I present a more detailed breakdown of both perceived closeness and behavior
when matched with another participant whose opinion of Trump was not revealed to the dictator in the
Online Appendix (see, for example, Figure OA.2).
well as more pro-sociality (14.9% vs. -22.9%, BSM, p<0.001). Notably, I find a marked
asymmetry between ingroup-love and outgroup-hate: the absolute negative average amount
in the misaligned condition is over-proportionally larger than the positive average amount
in the aligned condition (       22.9%     vs. 14.9%, BSM, p<0.01).14 For MGP, the observed
di↵erences are trivial in size and neither significant for perception of closeness (37.5% vs.
39.1%, BSM, p=0.51) nor for take-or-give behavior (12.0% vs. 13.5%, BSM, p=0.88). I
conclude that the political polarization frame evokes an emotional state that produces
traceable changes in both perceptions and behavior beyond the minimal group notion.
    Lastly, taking these results together provides a clear indication of whether and where
ingroup-love, outgroup-hate, or both simultaneously exist. In particular, perceptions of
closeness towards participants with a contrary opinion (one’s outgroup, 39.8%, red bar in
top-left panel) are indistinguishable in TP and in MGP, whether compared to someone
with the same preferences (37.5%, red bar bottom-left panel, p=0.40) or with the contrary
preferences (39.1%, green bar bottom-left panel, p=0.87). Thus, the political priming
produces no outgroup-hate with respect to perceived closeness. Conversely, one can clearly
observe ingroup-love since participants felt much stronger closeness towards their own
political faction (78.1%, green bar in top-left panel) compared to the perceived closeness in
the MGP. Interestingly, for actual behavior, one can observe a clear indication of outgrouphate but no indication of ingroup-love: with essentially fully overlapping error bars, the
pro-social behavior towards one’s own political faction (14.97%, green bar in top-right
panel) is indistinguishable from the behavior in MGP, regardless of whether their partners
held the same (13.54%, green bar bottom-right panel, p=0.78) or di↵erent (11.99%, red
bar bottom-right panel, p=0.56) painting preferences. Unambiguously, all of this is in
stark contrast to the behavior observed when matched with someone who has a contrary
opinion about Trump: the inflicted harm on this group is large (-22.9%, red bar top-right
panel). In sum, the results are compelling as they indicate that ingroup-love and outgrouphate are context-specific in that they only appear in the political prime. In other words,
ingroup-love occurs for perceived closeness and outgroup-hate occurs for actual behavior.
    Next, the same two dimensions (perception of closeness and behavior) are broken down
      See also Lelkes and Westwood (2017). It is worth noting that this asymmetry is seemingly not per se
driven by di↵erences between Trump haters and Trump lovers. As Figure OA.1 in the Online Appendix
shows, both types display the same average perception of closeness (57.5% vs. 59.0%, BSM, p=0.47).
However, it is driven by the fact that the average perceived closeness towards Trump Haters (65.7%) is
significantly larger than the perceived closeness towards Trump lovers (53.8%, BSM, p<0.001).
                                    ***                                         ***


                           n=205              n=212                                       n=212
                                                                      n=205


                           n=193              n=191                   n=193               n=191


Figure 2: Closeness and behavior broken down by being matched with a partner who either has aligned or contrary
opinions for both TP and MGP treatments. Perception of closeness is converted from a 7-point scale to % for
illustrative purposes. All adjacent bars are compared and absence of significance stars indicates p-values above 0.05.


by one’s own opinion of Trump and are presented in Figure 3. For the conditions using the
Trump Prime, I continue to find the previously observed and highly significant di↵erences
along both dimensions: for the perception of closeness, participants feel the strongest
(weakest) connection with the matched partner that has the same (opposing) view about
Trump (all p<0.001). The magnitudes and di↵erences are comparable for both Trump
haters and Trump lovers. Evidently, a similar pattern also arises for the measured behavior:
only those who are matched with a partner with the same opinion on Trump display
significant pro-social behavior on average (increase in the recipient’s endowment), whereas
                                      ***                               ***


                            n=145                n=145        n=60                 n=67


                                       ***                              ***


                                                 n=145                             n=67
                            n=145                             n=60


                            n=125                n=131        n=68                 n=60


                            n=125                n=131        n=68                 n=60


Figure 3: Closeness and behavior broken down by one’s own opinion and being matched with a partner who either
has aligned or contrary opinions for both TP and MGP treatments. All adjacent bars are compared and absence of
significance stars indicates p-values above 0.05.


those who are matched with a partner with opposing views about Trump leads to significant
anti-social behavior on average (decrease in the recipient’s endowment).
    It is worth pointing out that the previously observed asymmetry in behavior (see righthand side in Figure 2) now reappears in a more nuanced way: one can now observe that
the absolute magnitude of anti-social behavior outweighing the absolute magnitude of
pro-social behavior is driven by those who hate Trump (p<0.001), whereas the absolute
magnitudes are not statistically di↵erent for those who love Trump (p=0.146).15
       I find none of these di↵erences in MGP, neither for perceived closeness nor for behavior.
Notably, again, anti-social behavior in form of taking only occurs in the Trump Prime
conditions while the extent of pro-social behavior in the minimal group prime conditions
is indistinguishable from the behavior in the Trump Prime conditions. As later shown
in Figure 9, this maps well onto the di↵erent norm perceptions between Trump haters
and lovers: the former make a clear distinction between harming their ingroup versus the
outgroup, whereas the latter do not seem to make such a distinction.
       Notably, I once again observe that the levels of perceived closeness in MGP are indistinguishable from that towards someone with a contrary opinion on Trump, and half as much
than that towards someone with an aligned opinion on Trump. At the same time, the degree of pro-social behavior in MGP is the same as that of participants in the TP condition
when matched with someone who has an aligned Trump opinion, and much higher than
the overall anti-social behavior towards those with a contrary Trump opinion. Consistent
with the previous findings from Figure 2, I conclude that the concept of ingroup-love and
outgroup-hate is more nuanced than some existing research has suggested: in the context
of non-strategic decisions, ingroup-love occurs with respect to perceived closeness, whereas
outgroup-hate occurs with respect to altruistic behavior.
       In a last step, the results are evaluated in a regression framework that includes the
collected controls (age, gender, level of education, political affiliation, U.S. citizenship,
whether one voted in the 2016 election, and race). Without qualifications, all previously
presented findings hold and are presented in Table A.1 in the Main Appendix.


3. Experiment 2: Hate and Love in a Strategic Context

3.1. Data Collection and Experimental Design
       I capitalize on a 2 ⇥ 2 ⇥ 3 experimental design (Trump/minimal group prime ⇥ own
opinion about Trump ⇥ matched partner’s opinion about Trump / preference for paintings). Consistent with the analysis in Section 2, a total of 2 ⇥ 2 ⇥ 2 treatments will be
analyzed in the main body of the paper in that I only analyze the beliefs and behavior when
participants were either matched with someone who had the same or contrary preferences
    As illustrated in Figure OA.2 in the Online Appendix, both the perception of closeness and behavior
towards a matched partner whose opinion about Trump was not disclosed falls in between the perceived
closeness and behavior towards someone with an aligned and misaligned opinion about Trump.
towards Trump/paintings. For these conditions, data from 752 participants are analyzed.16
This leaves me with a total of 718 participants whose behavior will be analyzed shortly.


Treatment Variations
This experiment consists of three tasks to measure participants’ cooperativeness using
the “ABC of cooperation” approach (Gächter et al., 2017): a one-shot sequential public
goods game played with the strategy method to measure attitudes of cooperation, a beliefelicitation task to measure expectations of others’ cooperation, and a one-shot simultaneous
public goods game played with the direct response method to measure e↵ective contributions. The treatment variations closely follow those from Experiment 1 (see Section 2.1
for more details). For the Trump Prime (TP) treatments, the public goods games will be
played either by a pair of subjects with the same opinion about Trump (TH-TH or TL-TL),
with an opposing opinion about Trump (TH-TL or TL-TH), or by participants for which
the opinion about Trump are not disclosed to the other participant (TH-TU or TL-TU).
The same applies for the minimal group prime (MGP) treatments in which participants
are randomly matched based on own and the partner’s painting preferences.17 In sum,
this PGG variant creates the necessary environment to answer my research questions in
that it allows me to disentangle the mechanisms through which political polarization operates. By contrasting this to the minimal group setting, I am able to distinguish between
ingroup-love and outgroup hate. The design is detailed below and illustrated in Figure 4.
    Subjects are matched in pairs and take part in three tasks that are based on the game
explained above. All tasks are based on the following two-person, one-shot public goods
game. To simplify the mental e↵ort on the side of the participants, I follow the standard
notion of the game and use an MPCR of 0.75 (Isaac and Walker, 1988): each player is
endowed with $10 that she can either contribute to the public good or keep for herself.
Participants are able to give any integer amount between 0 and 10, thus providing eleven
options in total. Each dollar contributed to the public good is multiplied by 1.5 and then
equally divided between the two participants, irrespective of the individual‘s contribution.
As can be seen, the game embodies the classic tension between private and collective
     Data from participants in conditions that are not analyzed here are presented in the Online Appendix.
The pre-registration protocol (https://aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=bq76mi) with respect to targeted sample size and removal of unusable data mirrors the Dictator Game protocol as explained in Section 2.
     Again, note that for the purpose of brevity, results for the conditions where one was matched with a
partner for whom the opinions were undisclosed are relegated to the Online Appendix.
                     Trump Prime (TP)                                           Minimal Group Paradigm (MGP)
                        Treatments                                                       Treatments
               Stage I: Preference Elicitations                                        Stage I: Preference Elicitations

      1    Preference for Trump                                             1      Preference for Trump
           Participants are presented with a photo of Donald J.                    Same as in TP treatment.
           Trump wearing a ‘MAGA’ hat and are asked to rate
           their opinion about him from extreme hate to                     2      Preference for Paintings
           extreme love.                                                           Participants are presented with Klee and
                                                                                   Kandinsky paintings and are asked to
                                                                                   indicate which paintings they prefer.

      2    Closeness to matched partner                                     3      Closeness to matched partner
           ▪     Random matching with a partner who indicated                      ▪     Random matching with a partner who indicated
                 to either hate Trump, love Trump, or whose                              to either prefer Klee or Kandinsky paintings, or
                 opinion about Trump is not disclosed.                                   whose painting preferences are not disclosed.
           ▪     Participants were asked to indicate on the                        ▪     Participants were asked to indicate on the
                 ‘Inclusion of Other in the Self’ (IOS) scale one of                     ‘Inclusion of Other in the Self’ (IOS) scale one of
                 7 of circles (that range from just touching to                          7 of circles (that range from just touching to
                 almost completely overlapping) how close they                           almost completely overlapping) how close they
                 felt to their matched partner.                                          felt to their matched partner.


                     Stage II: Public Goods Game
                    Participants play three variants of a                                   Participants play three variants of a
                  public goods game (Gächter et al., 2017)                                public goods game (Gächter et al., 2017)

            Participants continue to be matched with the same                       Participants continue to be matched with the same
              partner. The matched partner’s opinion about                            partner. The matched partner’s preference for
                  Trump is displayed in one of three ways:                              paintings is displayed in one of three ways:


           Disclosed             Undisclosed            Disclosed                Preferes Klee          Undisclosed        Prefers Kandinsky
          Trump Hater         Trump Preference         Trump Lover                                   Painting Preference

            Participants are matched in pairs and play the ‘ABC                     Participants are matched in pairs and play the ‘ABC
            of Cooperation’ version of a public goods game. All                     of Cooperation’ version of a public goods game. All
            participants go through all 3 tasks (random order).                     participants go through all 3 tasks (random order).


                  1st task: attitudes (𝒂𝒊) towards cooperation                            1st task: attitudes (𝒂𝒊) towards cooperation
               Elicit a complete vector of conditional responses                       Elicit a complete vector of conditional responses
               using strategy method in the role of the trustee.                       using strategy method in the role of the trustee.


                 2nd task: beliefs (𝒃𝒊) about cooperation:                               2nd task: beliefs (𝒃𝒊) about cooperation:
           participants make a contribution decision towards a                     participants make a contribution decision towards a
           public good without learning their partner’s choice.                    public good without learning their partner’s choice.


                    3rd task: effective cooperation (𝒄𝒊)                                    3rd task: effective cooperation (𝒄𝒊)
           Participants make a contribution decision towards a                     Participants make a contribution decision towards a
           public good without learning their partner’s choice.                    public good without learning their partner’s choice.


Figure 4: Experimental design of the Public Goods Game for both the Trump Prime and the minimal group prime
conditions. Note that, for the purpose of brevity, the results for the conditions in which participants were matched
with a partner for whom the Trump/painting preference was not disclosed (indicated with a black arrow in this
figure) are relegated to the Online Appendix.
interest: while fully contributing to the public goods maximizes joint payo↵s, each player’s
self-interest is maximized by contributing nothing. Subjects play the tasks sequentially
and in random order, but receive no feedback on choices or earnings in any of the tasks
until the end of the experiment. Only one of the three tasks is used to calculate earnings,
and subjects are made aware of this fact at the beginning of the experiment. The task
used for calculating payments is randomly selected at the end of the experiment, after
subjects’ choices in all tasks have been collected. The average pay resulted in about $6.15
(including a $0.25 show-up fee). It took participants on average 15 minutes to complete
the experiment, which translates to an hourly payo↵ of about $24.6, and thus essentially
identical to the average payo↵ in Experiment 1.
    In the first task, I use a version of the game described above to measure players’ attitudes towards cooperation. Subjects are randomly assigned to be either a first-mover or a
second-mover, and only their choices in the relevant role are used to compute payo↵s.18 In
order to do so, participants play the game sequentially and I use the strategy method to
elicit the second-mover’s choices. That is, second-movers are asked to submit a contribution decision for each possible contribution choice made by the first-mover. This ensures
that, for each second-mover, one can observe a vector of contributions comprised of eleven
choices. I denote subject’s i contribution vector as ai . I use this vector of contributions to
classify subjects into “cooperation types” that reflect their underlying willingness to cooperate as a function of their opponent’s cooperativeness. Following the standard procedure
introduced by Fischbacher et al. (2001), subjects are classified into four types:
    • Free riders if they contribute $0, regardless of the first-mover’s contribution.
    • Conditional cooperators if they have a vector of contributions that is either weakly
      monotonically increasing in relationship to the first-mover’s contribution, or is not
      monotonically increasing but has a highly significant (at the 1% level) and positive
      Spearman rank correlation coefficient (between own and others’ contribution).
    • Unconditional cooperators if they contribute a positive amount that does not vary
      across di↵erent first-mover’s contributions.
    • Other if they cannot be classified according to any of the previous criteria.
     The task is played using role-uncertainty. That is, all subjects are asked to provide decisions in both
the role of first-mover and second-mover, without knowing which role they will actually be assigned in the
task until after all decisions have been collected.
    In the second task, I elicit subjects’ e↵ective contributions using a simultaneous version of the public goods game described above. Subjects make a contribution decision in
direct-response mode, without learning the contribution choice of their opponent. I denote
subject’s i e↵ective vector as ci .
    In the third task I elicit subjects’ expectations about the cooperativeness of their opponent. Subjects are asked to guess the contribution that their opponent has made in
the simultaneous public goods game (i.e., the second task). Subjects are rewarded for the
accuracy of their guess: if their guess is within $2, they receive a bonus of $0.50. I denote
the subject’s i belief regarding the opponent’s contribution as bi .

3.2. Hypotheses
    In line with the previously reviewed literature and the hypotheses presented in Experiment 1, an ingroup-love/outgroup-hate e↵ect can be expected.19

H3 : Participants will exhibit stronger closeness, more pronounced attitudes towards cooperation (ai ), higher beliefs about the partner’s cooperativeness (bi ), and more e↵ective
cooperation (ci ) when matched with a partner who has the same opinion about Trump
(TH-TH or TL-TL), whereas these numbers are the lowest when the matched partner’s
Trump opinion is misaligned (TH-TL or TL-TH).

    As before, this experiment will also examine the asymmetry between hate and love
along the tested dimensions.

H4 : Participants will exhibit disproportionately larger outgroup-hate than ingroup-love.

3.3. Results
    The results from both the Trump Prime and the minimal group prime reveal a pattern that is consistent with my previous findings: when matched with a partner who has
an aligned opinion about Trump, participants felt closer, had higher expectations of the
partner’s contribution, and e↵ectively contributed more in the PGG (top panel of Figure
5) as compared to when participants were matched with a partner who had a contrary
opinion about Trump (all p<0.01). In stark contrast, none of these di↵erences appear in
the minimal group prime conditions (bottom panel of Figure 5).
     As before, while the main focus of this experiment will focus on beliefs and behaviors towards own and
opposing factions, the comparison with the participant for whom the opinion about Trump is not disclosed
                             ***                            ***                         ***


                         n=195     n=180            n=195     n=180             n=195     n=180


                         n=174     n=169            n=174     n=169             n=174     n=169


Figure 5: Closeness, belief, and behavior broken down by being matched with a partner who either has aligned or
contrary opinions for both TP and MGP treatments. All adjacent bars are compared and absence of significance
stars indicates p-values above 0.05.


    As is the case for Experiment 1, by comparing the beliefs and behaviors in TP with
those in MGP, one can also make statements about whether the observed results derive
from ingroup-love, outgroup-hate, or both. Consistent with those previous results, one can


allows me to make to draw an inference about whether the observed behavior is ingroup-love or outgroup
hate, or both. For brevity, I relegate these pairwise comparisons to the Online Appendix.
again clearly see that the pattern of perceived closeness is one of ingroup-love (red bars
have about the same height, whereas the green bars are much higher in TP than in MGP).
On the contrary, for both beliefs about other’s contributions and one‘s own contribution,
we observe outgroup-hate rather than ingroup-love (green bars have about the same height,
whereas the red bars are much lower in TP than in MGP).
       Next, I zoom in on the perception of closeness, the beliefs (bi ) about other’s contributions and one’s own e↵ective contributions (ci ) in the PGG, and present the results in
Figure 6. For Trump haters, the results are remarkably consistent: for all three measures,
the magnitude is significantly higher when matched with another Trump hater (all comparisons p<0.001). For the Trump lovers, on the other hand, one can observe that the
discrimination between ingroup and outgroup only holds for the perceived closeness and bi ,
but not for ci . There, Trump lovers contribute a statistically indistinguishable amount of
about 55-62% of the maximum amount, irrespective of whether they were matched with another Trump lover or a Trump hater (p=0.253). As later shown in Figure 11, these findings
are consistent with the norm elicitation: Trump lovers do not display an ingroup/outgroup
di↵erentiation in terms of free riding or cooperation, whereas Trump haters do. The regressions in Table A.2 (presented in the Main Appendix) confirm these results, and it is
evident that the observed behavioral di↵erences are driven by the di↵erences in perceived
closeness. As before, no significant di↵erences occur along all these dimensions for the
minimal group prime conditions (bottom Figure 6). This confirms again that the results
are not driven by ingroup-outgroup considerations alone, but that the observed disparities
in perceptions, beliefs, and own cooperativeness largely rest on the emotional state that
comes with the political polarization.
       As before, I examine whether the results reflect ingroup-love, outgroup-hate, or both by
comparing both beliefs and behaviors in TP to those in MGP. I reach the same conclusions
as above for both those who hate Trump and those who love Trump: ingroup-love occurs
for perception of closeness, whereas outgroup-hate occurs for beliefs about other’s contributions and one’s own contribution.20 Consistent with the theme and the previous findings
     This finding is further confirmed when comparing one’s beliefs about other’s contribution and one’s
own contribution in the treatment where participants were matched with someone whose Trump opinion
is not disclosed. This comparison is largely insignificant (significant) when tested against beliefs and
behaviors towards a partner with the same (contrary) opinion on Trump. A detailed breakdown including
the treatment in which participants were matched with a partner whose preference towards Trump was not
disclosed is illustrated in Figure OA.4 in the Online Appendix.
                         ***          ***              ***           **              ***


                      n=123 n=127   n=72 n=53       n=123 n=127   n=72   n=53     n=123 n=127   n=72   n=53


                      n=113 n=121   n=61 n=48       n=113 n=121   n=61   n=48     n=113 n=121   n=61   n=48


Figure 6: broken down by being matched with a partner who either has aligned or contrary opinions for both TP
and MGP treatments. All adjacent bars are compared and absence of significance stars indicates p-values above 0.05.


of this paper, ingroup-love and outgroup-hate are nuanced concepts and their occurrence
depends on what is investigated.
    For the final part of the investigation, I follow the tradition of Fischbacher et al. (2001)
and analyze the distribution of ‘types’ across the various treatments. I follow the previously
introduced classification and distinguish between Conditional Cooperators (CC), Unconditional Cooperators (UC), Free Riders (FR), and Others (see Section 3.1 for details).
    Zooming in, one can observe that essentially all type classification are insensitive to
                                                                                   **


                                                                     ***


Figure 7: Closeness, belief, and behavior broken down by one’s own opinion and being matched with a partner
who either has aligned or contrary opinions for both TP and MGP treatments. All adjacent bars are compared and
absence of significance stars indicates p-values above 0.05.


whom one is matched with, regardless of the treatment prime (Figure 7).21 In combination
with the previous insights from the Trump prime conditions, this is a key result worth
     Most di↵erences do not achieve the pre-registered alpha level of 5%. For TP, the only significant
di↵erences is observed for the ‘Others’ group with p=0.011. Although visually distinct, the di↵erences for
Conditional Cooperators only achieve significance at the 10% level at p=0.06 and p=0.09 for Trump-hater
and Trump-lover, respectively. For MGP, the only reliably significant di↵erence (p<0.01) can be observed
for the Unconditional Cooperators among Trump haters. For Conditional Cooperators, the di↵erences reach
p=0.11 and p=0.34 for Trump haters and Trump lovers, respectively.
stressing: the observed inter-faction animosity in form of ingroup/outgroup variability in
contributions is a result of fallacious beliefs about the other’s behavior (see top panel of
Figure 6) and not of adverse preferences per se (see top panel of Figure 7). In the latter,
it becomes apparent that participants are perfectly fine to cooperate with the opposing
faction, regardless of one’s partisanship. The implication is that the impact of political
polarization should be counteracted by correcting the bleak expectations that the factions
have about each other.


4. Experiment 3: Social Norms in Non-Strategic and Strategic Contexts

4.1. Data Collection and Experimental Design
       In this experiment, I analyze the norm perceptions of Trump haters and Trump lovers
utilizing the incentive-compatible approach by Krupka and Weber (2013) across various
contexts. The contribution of this experiment is to understand whether the social norm
perceptions map onto the heterogeneous ingroup-love and outgroup-hate by contrasting
the results of this experiment with the previously discussed results (Experiments 2 and 3).
To achieve robustness and maximize statistical power, the design contains both betweenand within-subject variation:

       • Between-subject variation: As before, participants first see a picture of Donald
         J. Trump and are asked to indicate on a Likert scale how they feel about him. Thus,
         hate and love towards Trump constitute the between-subject dimension.

       • Within-subject variation: In random order, participants were informed of the
         structure of the T-o-G dictator game and PGG exactly as it had been explained to
         participants in Experiment 1 and Experiment 2. Subsequently, using the elicitation
         technique of Krupka and Weber (2013), participants were asked to rate the appropriateness of various behaviors in those games that were presented in random order.22
     As is customary in this norm elicitation procedure, the participants were asked to rate the appropriateness of the observed behavior along four dimensions: Very Socially Inappropriate (VSI), Somewhat
Socially Inappropriate (SI), Somewhat Socially Appropriate (SA), and Very Socially Appropriate (VSA).
For the dictator game, participants were asked to rate the appropriateness for three distinct behaviors: the
dictator making no change to the initial endowments, the dictator taking money from the receiver, and the
dictator giving money to the receiver. For the PGG, the participants rated the appropriateness for four
distinct behaviors: contribute nothing, contribute nothing when others contribute something (= free-rider),
contribute everything (= full cooperator), and contribute more the more the matched partner contributes
(= conditional cooperator). Other results are relegated to the Online Appendix.
         To stay as close to the original designs as possible, these ratings were elicited from
         the perspective of being matched with other participants who either had the same,
         the opposite, or an unknown opinion about Trump. Participants observed all three
         variations in random order. Importantly, to ensure reliable norm-inferences, each participant’s beliefs were elicited only from the perspective of one’s own opinion about
         Trump.23 These matching variations constitute the three within-subject dimensions.

       In sum, the two within- and three between-subject variations represent exactly the same
2 ⇥ 3 = 6 dimensions, the same dimensions explored in Experiments 1 and 2. To achieve
proper statistical power, observations from a total of n=298 participants were collected
(leaving me with n=232 participants after applying pre-registered removal criteria), neither
of which have previously participated in Experiment 1 or Experiment 2.24 Out of these,
162 participants (70%) indicated to hate Trump and 70 participants (30%) indicated to
love Trump – a split comparable to the one obtained in Experiments 1 and 2.

4.2. Results for the T-o-G Dictator Game
       In this section, the results from the dictator game, as discussed in Section 2.3 (especially
in Figures 2 and 3), will be analyzed through the lens of a norm elicitation that follows
the method of Krupka and Weber (2013).25
       The first set of results is presented in Figure 8 and paints a picture that is extremely
consistent with both the observed closeness and dictator behavior behavior, as illustrated
in Figure 2: when matched with a partner who has an aligned opinion about Trump,
taking from (giving to) that partner is perceived as more inappropriate (more appropriate)
compared to when matched with a partner who has a misaligned opinion about Trump
(all di↵erences significant at p<0.001 using BSM tests).
     For example, a participant who initially indicated to hate Trump would only be asked to rate the
appropriateness of various behaviors based on the matching of a Trump-hater with either another Trumphater, a Trump-lover, or someone with an unknown opinion of Trump. Similarly, a Trump-lover would only
be asked to rate the appropriateness from the perspective of another Trump-lover having been matched
with one of the three possible partners.
     As before and per pre-registration (https://aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=xn9vb3), unusable data were
dropped either because participants indicated to be indi↵erent about Trump or because they did not pass
the attention/manipulation checks.
     Consistent with the previous analyses, the main focus remains the behavior towards partners with the
same or contrary opinion of Trump. In the Online Appendix, I present analyses that include perceptions
when matched with a partner for whom the opinion about Trump remains undisclosed.
                                                           ***


                                                  n=232                                           n=232


                                                                                                          ***
     ***


                                                  n=232                                           n=232


                                                         ***
Figure 8: Norm perceptions for taking and giving money with partners who have aligned or contrary feelings
towards Trump. All adjacent quadrants are tested and statistical significance (if either ***p<0.01 or **p<0.05) is
indicated where applicable. Very Socially Inappropriate (VSI), Somewhat Socially Inappropriate (SSI), Somewhat
Socially Appropriate (SSA), and Very Socially Appropriate (VSA).


    These insights complement the results from Figure 2 and suggest that the observed
di↵erences in feeling of closeness and pro-sociality towards a partner who has an aligned
opinion about Trump go hand in hand with the norm perception that this is indeed the
right thing to do, whereas it is perceived to be more appropriate to harm someone with a
contrary opinion about Trump.
    Next, following the previous analyses in Figure 3, I analyze the norm perceptions conditional on one’s own opinion about Trump and present the results separately for taking
behavior (top of Figure 9) and giving behavior (bottom of Figure 9). As before, the norm
elicitations are consistent with the observed closeness and dictator game behaviors.
    For taking behavior, those who identified as Trump haters indicate that it is more
acceptable to take from a Trump-lover (TH-TL) than from a fellow Trump-hater (THTH), which is highly statistically significant (BSM, p<0.001). Conversely, I do not observe
the same di↵erence for those who identified as Trump lovers (BSM, p=0.81), which is
primarily driven by the fact that those who are matched with their own kind have a
substantially higher approval for taking money from their partner than Trump haters have
when matched with their own kind (comparing TL-TL vs. TH-TH, BSM, p<0.001).
                                                           ***


                                                  n=162                                           n=70


     ***


                                                  n=162                                           n=70


                                                               **


                                                  n=162                                           n=70
     ***


                                                                                                         ***
                                                  n=162                                           n=70


Figure 9: Norm perceptions for taking and giving money conditional on own and matched partner’s Trump opinion. All adjacent quadrants are tested and statistical significance (if either ***p<0.01 or **p<0.05) is indicated
where applicable. Very Socially Inappropriate (VSI), Somewhat Socially Inappropriate (SSI), Somewhat Socially
Appropriate (SSA), and Very Socially Appropriate (VSA).


    Consistent with the theme of this paper, these results indicate that hate evokes stronger
norms against harming each other and, additionally, those who love Trump do not distinguish between ingroup-love and outgroup-hate with respect to harming others.
       In terms of giving behavior, one can observe that being matched with a participant
with the same preference for Trump leads to a significantly higher appropriateness rating
compared to giving to a participant with a misaligned opinion of Trump (comparing TH-TH
vs. TH-TL and TL-TL vs. TL-TH, BSM, both p-vales <0.001). In addition, consistent
with the previous results, joint hate for Trump evokes a stronger bond in the form of
appropriateness for giving than joint love (comparing TH-TH vs. TL-TL, BSM, p=0.0199).
       Taken together, one can conclude that the perceived social norms map convincingly
onto the observed T-o-G dictator game behavior and can explain the observed behavioral di↵erences between Trump haters and Trump lovers as well as their perceptions and
attitudes towards people with aligned and misaligned opinions about Donald J. Trump.

4.3. Results for the Public Goods Game
       Following the previous analyses, this section reports the norm perceptions across various
possible behaviors in the PGG (free-riding and full cooperation) for the di↵erent treatments
and reported Trump preferences.26 These behaviors are defined as followed: free-riding
refers to the decision to benefit from the public good by contributing nothing, even though
one’s matched partner contributes a non-zero amount. Full cooperation refers to the
decision to contribute the full amount regardless of the partner’s behavior.
       The results presented in Figure 10 paint a clear picture: participants perceive it as more
socially appropriate to free-ride on a partner who has a contrary opinion about Trump,
but less socially appropriate to fully cooperate with the same partner (both p<0.01).
       In addition, one can observe in Figure 11 that the previous results very much depend on
one’s stated preference towards Trump: the previously mentioned di↵erential perception of
appropriateness for free-riding is entirely driven by Trump haters (p<0.001), whereas there
is no significant di↵erence for Trump lovers (p=0.47). The same is true for full cooperation
(bottom of Figure 11): Trump haters perceive it as more socially appropriate to fully
cooperate with a partner who has an aligned Trump opinion (p<0.001). Again, Trump
lovers do not make a distinction irrespective of whom they are matched with (p=0.72).
This maps well onto the result presented in Figure 6 (top-right panel) showing that only
Trump haters make an ingroup-outgroup di↵erentiation in their level of contribution.
    In the Online Appendix, I also present the norm elicitations for two other behaviors: Contribute Nothing
and Conditional Cooperator.
                                                                ***


                                                   n=232                                            n=232
     ***


                                                                                                            ***
                                                   n=232                                            n=232


                                                                ***

Figure 10: Norm perceptions for free riding and full cooperation with partners who have aligned or contrary feelings
towards Trump. All adjacent quadrants are tested and statistical significance (if either ***p<0.01 or **p<0.05) is
indicated where applicable. Very Socially Inappropriate (VSI), Somewhat Socially Inappropriate (SSI), Somewhat
Socially Appropriate (SSA), and Very Socially Appropriate (VSA).


    Noteworthy, these findings are consistent with the results discussed in Section 3.3 in
that Trump haters show a clear ingroup-love/outgroup-hate distinction, whereas Trump
lovers do not seem to make this distinction and treat either participant in the same way. It
is important to note that although Trump lovers do not discriminate between their matched
partners, they perceive it as much more socially appropriate to free-ride on their partner
than Trump haters do (p<0.001, not illustrated).
    From a big picture perspective, the findings are in harmony with the existing social
norms research and can be subsumed under the umbrella of conditional norm followers
(Bicchieri, 2006; Bicchieri et al., 2019): people display a preference for cooperation that
is conditional on empirical expectations (beliefs about the matched partner’s behavior, as
measured in Experiment 3) and normative expectations (as measured in this experiment
using the method by Krupka and Weber, 2013). Combining both types of elicitations
provides a comprehensive evaluation of beliefs, preferences, and behaviors.
                                                              ***


                                                      n=162                                              n=70
       ***


                                                      n=162                                              n=70


                                                      n=162                                              n=70
       ***


                                                      n=162                                              n=70


Figure 11: Norm perceptions for free riding and full cooperation conditional on own and matched partner’s Trump
opinion. All adjacent quadrants are tested and statistical significance (if either ***p<0.01 or **p<0.05) is indicated
where applicable. Very Socially Inappropriate (VSI), Somewhat Socially Inappropriate (SSI), Somewhat Socially
Appropriate (SSA), and Very Socially Appropriate (VSA).
5. Conclusion and Discussion

   I examine the impact of political polarization on behaviors, beliefs, and norms through
the lens of three experiments of both strategic and non-strategic nature. This paper is
concerned with the extent to which polarization succeeds in a↵ecting pro- and anti-social
behavior, cooperativeness, and the perception of social norms with respect to these behaviors. I embed polarization by capitalizing on participants’ negative/positive opinions
about Donald J. Trump and compare the outcomes to those observed in treatments using
the standard minimal identity paradigm to disentangle ingroup-love from outgroup-hate.
   Along all investigated dimensions, I obtain strong e↵ects and the following results:
for one, polarization produces ingroup/outgroup di↵erentiation in all three settings (nonstrategic, Experiment 1; strategic, Experiment 2; social norms, Experiment 3), leading
participants to actively harm and cooperate less with participants from the opposing faction. For another, lack of cooperation is not the result of a categorical unwillingness to
cooperate across factions, but based on one’s grim expectations about the other’s willingness to cooperate. Importantly, however, the results also cast light on the nuance with
which ingroup-love and outgroup-hate – something that existing literature often takes as
being two sides of the same coin – occurs. In particular, by comparing behavior between the
Trump Prime and minimal group prime treatments, the results suggest that ingroup-love
can be observed in terms of feeling close to one another, whereas outgroup hate appears in
form of taking money away from and being less cooperative with each other. The elicited
norms are consistent with these observations and also point out that those who love Trump
have a much weaker ingroup/outgroup di↵erentiation than those who hate Trump do.
   The results yield actionable policy prescriptions: by correcting the misguided beliefs
about the preferences and actions of the opposing faction, one may be able to alleviate the
pernicious outcomes in the context of cooperative and altruistic behavior. Existing research
(e.g., Bicchieri and Dimant, 2019; Bursztyn et al., 2020, for a discussion in the context of
politics see Flynn et al., 2017 and for a cross-cultural perspective see Ruggeri et al., 2020)
has pointed to ways in which such social beliefs can be corrected – or at the least abate their
inaccuracy – and be utilized by future research in the context of political polarization. This
is particularly important since people are found to consume political information selectively,
which aggravates the partisan rift (Dorison et al., 2019). An avenue for future research is
to put more weight on the role of context and methodological approaches in uncovering
the various forms in which polarization occurs and can be contained.
References
Abramowitz, A. I. and Saunders, K. L. (2006). Exploring the bases of partisanship in the american
  electorate: Social identity vs. ideology. Political Research Quarterly, 59(2):175–187.
Abramowitz, A. I. and Webster, S. W. (2018). Negative partisanship: Why americans dislike parties
  but behave like rabid partisans. Political Psychology, 39:119–135.
Akerlof, G. A. (1997). Social distance and social decisions. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 1005–1027.
Akerlof, G. A. and Kranton, R. E. (2000). Economics and identity. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 115(3):715–753.
Alesina, A., Baqir, R., and Easterly, W. (1999). Public goods and ethnic divisions. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114(4):1243–1284.
Amira, K., Wright, J. C., and Goya-Tocchetto, D. (2019). In-group love versus out-group hate:
 Which is more important to partisans and when? Political Behavior, pages 1–22.
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., and Smollan, D. (1992). Inclusion of other in the self scale and the structure
  of interpersonal closeness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63(4):596.
Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G., and Majlesi, K. (2020). Importing political polarization? the
  electoral consequences of rising trade exposure. American Economic Review.
Bardsley, N. (2008).   Dictator game giving: altruism or artefact?        Experimental Economics,
  11(2):122–133.
Becker, J., Porter, E., and Centola, D. (2019). The wisdom of partisan crowds. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 116(22):10717–10722.
Bénabou, R. and Tirole, J. (2016). Mindful economics: The production, consumption, and value
   of beliefs. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3):141–64.
Bernhard, H., Fischbacher, U., and Fehr, E. (2006). Parochial altruism in humans. Nature,
  442(7105):912–915.
Bhanot, S. P. and Hopkins, D. J. (2020). Partisan polarization and resistance to elite messages:
  Results from survey experiments on social distancing. Journal of Behavioral Public Administration.
Bicchieri, C. (2006). The grammar of society: The nature and dynamics of social norms. Cambridge
  University Press.
Bicchieri, C. and Dimant, E. (2019). Nudging with Care: The Risks and Benefits of Social Information. Public Choice.
Bicchieri, C., Dimant, E., Gächter, S., and Nosenzo, D. (2020).  Observability, social
  proximity, and the erosion of norm compliance.    Working Paper Available at SSRN:
  https://ssrn.com/abstract=3355028.
Bicchieri, C., Dimant, E., and Sonderegger, S. (2019). It’s not a lie if you believe the norm does
  not apply: Conditional norm-following with strategic beliefs. Working Paper Available at SSRN:
  https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3326146.
Bowles, S. and Gintis, H. (2013). A cooperative species: Human reciprocity and its evolution.
  Princeton University Press.
Buhrmester, M. D., Talaifar, S., and Gosling, S. D. (2018). An evaluation of amazon’s mechanical
  turk, its rapid rise, and its e↵ective use. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 13(2):149–154.
Bursztyn, L., González, A. L., and Yanagizawa-Drott, D. (2020). Misperceived social norms:
  Women working outside the home in saudi arabia. American Economic Review.
Cantoni, D., Yang, D. Y., Yuchtman, N., and Zhang, Y. J. (2019). Protests as strategic games:
  experimental evidence from hong kong’s antiauthoritarian movement. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 134(2):1021–1077.
Charness, G., Rigotti, L., and Rustichini, A. (2007). Individual behavior and group membership.
  American Economic Review, 97(4):1340–1352.
Chen, Y. and Li, S. X. (2009). Group identity and social preferences. American Economic Review,
  99(1):431–57.
Christ, O., Schmid, K., Lolliot, S., Swart, H., Stolle, D., Tausch, N., Al Ramiah, A., Wagner,
  U., Vertovec, S., and Hewstone, M. (2014). Contextual e↵ect of positive intergroup contact on
  outgroup prejudice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(11):3996–4000.
Croson, R. and Shang, J. Y. (2008). The impact of downward social information on contribution
  decisions. Experimental Economics, 11(3):221–233.
Dimant, E. (2019). Contagion of pro-and anti-social behavior among peers and the role of social
  proximity. Journal of Economic Psychology, 73:66–88.
Dixit, A. K. and Weibull, J. W. (2007). Political polarization. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 104(18):7351–7356.
Dorison, C. A., Minson, J. A., and Rogers, T. (2019). Selective exposure partly relies on faulty
  a↵ective forecasts. Cognition, 188:98–107.
Druckman, J. N. and Levendusky, M. S. (2019). What do we measure when we measure a↵ective
  polarization? Public Opinion Quarterly, 83(1):114–122.
E↵erson, C., Lalive, R., and Fehr, E. (2008). The coevolution of cultural groups and ingroup
  favoritism. Science, 321(5897):1844–1849.
Fehr, E. and Fischbacher, U. (2003). The nature of human altruism. Nature, 425(6960):785–791.
Fiorina, M. P. and Abrams, S. J. (2008). Political polarization in the american public. Annual
  Review of Political Science, 11:563–588.
Fischbacher, U., Gächter, S., and Fehr, E. (2001). Are people conditionally cooperative? Evidence
  from a public goods experiment. Economics Letters, 71(3):397–404.
Flynn, D., Nyhan, B., and Reifler, J. (2017). The nature and origins of misperceptions: Understanding false and unsupported beliefs about politics. Political Psychology, 38:127–150.
Fowler, J. H. and Kam, C. D. (2007). Beyond the self: Social identity, altruism, and political
  participation. The Journal of Politics, 69(3):813–827.
Gächter, S., Kölle, F., and Quercia, S. (2017). Reciprocity and the tragedies of maintaining and
  providing the commons. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(9):650.
Gächter, S., Starmer, C., and Tufano, F. (2015). Measuring the closeness of relationships: a
  comprehensive evaluation of the ’inclusion of the other in the self’ scale. PloS one, 10(6).
Graham, M. H. and Svolik, M. W. (2020). Democracy in america? partisanship, polarization, and
  the robustness of support for democracy in the united states. American Political Science Review,
  114(2):392–409.
Greene, S. (1999). Understanding party identification: A social identity approach. Political Psychology, 20(2):393–403.
Halevy, N., Bornstein, G., and Sagiv, L. (2008). “in-group love” and “out-group hate” as motives
  for individual participation in intergroup conflict: A new game paradigm. Psychological Science,
  19(4):405–411.
Hara, K., Adams, A., Milland, K., Savage, S., Callison-Burch, C., and Bigham, J. P. (2018). A
  data-driven analysis of workers’ earnings on amazon mechanical turk. In Proceedings of the 2018
  CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, page 449. ACM.
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., and McElreath, R. (2001).
  In search of homo economicus: behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies. American
  Economic Review, 91(2):73–78.
Isaac, R. M. and Walker, J. M. (1988). Communication and free-riding behavior: The voluntary
   contribution mechanism. Economic Inquiry, 26(4):585–608.
Iyengar, S., Lelkes, Y., Levendusky, M., Malhotra, N., and Westwood, S. J. (2019). The origins and
   consequences of a↵ective polarization in the united states. Annual Review of Political Science,
   22:129–146.
Iyengar, S. and Westwood, S. J. (2015). Fear and loathing across party lines: New evidence on
   group polarization. American Journal of Political Science, 59(3):690–707.
Jacobson, G. C. (2019). Presidents and Parties in the Public Mind. University of Chicago Press.
Klein, E. (2020). Why We’re Polarized. Avid Reader Press / Simon & Schuster.
Kranton, R. E. and Sanders, S. G. (2017). Groupy versus non-groupy social preferences: Personality,
  region, and political party. American Economic Review, 107(5):65–69.
Krupka, E. L. and Weber, R. A. (2013). Identifying social norms using coordination games: Why
  does dictator game sharing vary? Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(3):495–524.
Lees, J. and Cikara, M. (2020). Inaccurate group meta-perceptions drive negative out-group attributions in competitive contexts. Nature Human Behaviour, 4(3):279–286.
Lelkes, Y. and Westwood, S. J. (2017). The limits of partisan prejudice. The Journal of Politics,
  79(2):485–501.
Levendusky, M. S. and Malhotra, N. (2016). (Mis) perceptions of partisan polarization in the
  American public. Public Opinion Quarterly, 80(S1):378–391.
List, J. A. (2007). On the interpretation of giving in dictator games. Journal of Political Economy,
  115(3):482–493.
Madestam, A., Shoag, D., Veuger, S., and Yanagizawa-Drott, D. (2013). Do political protests matter? evidence from the tea party movement. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4):1633–
 1685.
Mason, L. (2015). “I disrespectfully agree”: The di↵erential e↵ects of partisan sorting on social
 and issue polarization. American Journal of Political Science, 59(1):128–145.
Mason, L. (2018). Uncivil agreement: How politics became our identity. University of Chicago
 Press.
Mazumder, S. (2018). The persistent e↵ect of us civil rights protests on political attitudes. American
 Journal of Political Science, 62(4):922–935.
Meyer, D. S. (2004). Protest and political opportunities. Annu. Rev. Sociol., 30:125–145.
Michelitch, K. (2015). Does electoral competition exacerbate interethnic or interpartisan economic
  discrimination? evidence from a field experiment in market price bargaining. The American
  Political Science Review, 109(1):43.
Mo↵att, P. G. (2015). Experimetrics: Econometrics for experimental economics. Palgrave.
Moore-Berg, S. L., Ankori-Karlinsky, L.-O., Hameiri, B., and Bruneau, E. (2020). Exaggerated
 meta-perceptions predict intergroup hostility between American political partisans. Proceedings
 of the National Academy of Sciences.
Müller, K. and Schwarz, C. (2019). From hashtag to hate crime: Twitter and anti-minority sentiment. Working Paper Available at SSRN: https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3149103.
O↵erman, T. (2002).      Hurting hurts more than helping helps.        European Economic Review,
  46(8):1423–1437.
Orr, L. V. and Huber, G. A. (2020). The policy basis of measured partisan animosity in the united
  states. American Journal of Political Science, 64(3):569–586.
Reich, M. (2017). Racial inequality: A political-economic analysis. Princeton University Press.
Ruggeri, K. et al. (2020). The general fault in our fault lines. Working Paper Available at:
  https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/xvksa.
Schwalbe, M. C., Cohen, G. L., and Ross, L. D. (2020). The objectivity illusion and voter polarization in the 2016 presidential election. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Shi, F., Teplitskiy, M., Duede, E., and Evans, J. A. (2019). The wisdom of polarized crowds. Nature
  Human Behaviour, 3(4):329–336.
Tajfel, H. and Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. The Social
  Psychology of Intergroup Relations, 33(47):74.
West, E. A. and Iyengar, S. (2020). Partisanship as a social identity: Implications for polarization.
 Political Behavior, pages 1–32.
Westwood, S. J., Peterson, E., and Lelkes, Y. (2019). Are there still limits on partisan prejudice?
 Public Opinion Quarterly, 83(3):584–597.
Yamagishi, T. and Mifune, N. (2009). Social exchange and solidarity: in-group love or out-group
  hate? Evolution and Human Behavior, 30(4):229–237.
                                         Main Appendix


                                   3DUWLFLSDQWV 2SLQLRQV$ERXW7UXPS
          


          
3HUFHQW


          


          


           
               ([WUHPH+DWH    0RGHUDWH+DWH       ,QGLIIHUHQW     0RGHUDWH/RYH     ([WUHPH/RYH


                 Figure A.1: Histogram of Trump opinions for both TP and MGP treatments.
                       Table A.1: OLS Regression Analysis of T-o-G Dictator Game Behavior


                                      Model 1        Model 2         Model 3     Model 4       Model 5            Model 6

Matched with Aligned                  38.491⇤⇤⇤     31.762⇤⇤⇤        32.752⇤⇤⇤
  Trump Preference                     (5.593)       (6.537)          (6.927)
Closeness Score (%)                                   0.176⇤          0.182⇤                   0.222⇤⇤⇤           0.244⇤⇤⇤
                                                     (0.091)          (0.098)                   (0.078)            (0.081)
Loves Trump                                                                      -32.514⇤⇤⇤    -23.298⇤⇤          -17.790⇤
                                                                                  (8.837)       (9.316)           (10.428)
Matched with Unknown                                                             -15.075⇤⇤       -7.334            -5.913
                                                                                  (6.551)       (6.999)            (7.127)
Matched with Trump Lover                                                         -36.979⇤⇤⇤   -28.519⇤⇤⇤         -29.041⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                  (6.876)       (7.423)            (7.599)
Loves Trump ⇥                                                                    53.546⇤⇤⇤     44.381⇤⇤⇤         43.285⇤⇤⇤
  Matched with Unknown                                                           (12.054)      (12.269)           (12.441)
Loves Trump ⇥                                                                    78.557⇤⇤⇤     61.561⇤⇤⇤         58.618⇤⇤⇤
  Matched with Trump Lover                                                       (11.819)      (13.191)           (13.500)
Constant                             -23.514⇤⇤⇤     -30.548⇤⇤⇤        -35.416    12.083⇤⇤⇤       -5.472           -31.785
                                       (4.398)       (5.623)         (36.886)     (4.302)       (7.286)           (30.163)

Controls                                 No             No             Yes          No            No                 Yes
Observations                             423           423             416          598           598                586
DV: Dictator game behavior (neg. = taking; pos. = giving). Standard errors in parentheses. ⇤ p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01.
                         Table A.2: OLS Regression Analysis of PGG Contribution Behavior


                                           Model 1     Model 2     Model 3     Model 4      Model 5        Model 6
Matched with Aligned                       13.427⇤⇤⇤    4.355       5.281
 Trump Preference                           (3.815)    (4.412)     (4.506)
Closeness Score (%)                                    0.250⇤⇤⇤    0.196⇤⇤⇤                 0.217⇤⇤⇤       0.156⇤⇤⇤
                                                       (0.064)     (0.065)                   (0.053)        (0.054)
Loves Trump                                                                     -10.873⇤⇤     -3.703         -8.452
                                                                                 (5.336)     (5.392)        (6.307)
Matched with Unknown                                                              -7.643      -1.019         -4.873
                                                                                 (4.870)     (5.081)        (5.175)
Matched with Trump Lover                                                       -17.200⇤⇤⇤     -8.490       -10.530⇤
                                                                                 (4.974)     (5.453)        (5.490)
Loves Trump ⇥                                                                   22.953⇤⇤⇤    12.896⇤       14.058⇤
 Matched with Unknown                                                            (7.593)     (7.751)        (7.897)
Loves Trump ⇥                                                                   23.904⇤⇤⇤      8.696         10.640
 Matched with Trump Lover                                                        (7.662)     (8.359)        (8.216)
Constant                                   51.029⇤⇤⇤   39.658⇤⇤⇤   -40.529⇤⇤    65.748⇤⇤⇤   47.743⇤⇤⇤       -11.477
                                            (2.805)     (4.132)     (16.652)     (3.287)     (5.711)       (13.972)

Controls                                     No          No          Yes          No          No             Yes
Observations                                 388         388         373          537         537            519
Dependent variable is a participants contribution (%) to the PGG. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
⇤
    p < 0.10, ⇤⇤ p < 0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < 0.01.
              Online Appendix to “Hate Trumps Love:
    The Role of Rising Political Polarization in Social Preferences”


                                  Eugen Dimant


Contents
  I. Experiment 1 (Dictator Game): Additional Results and Robustness Checks

  II. Experiment 2 (Public Goods Game): Additional Results and Robustness Checks

  III. Experiment 3 (Norm Elicitation): Additional Results and Robustness Checks
     III.a. Dictator Game
     III.b. Public Goods Game

  IV. Experimental Screenshots
I. Experiment 1: Additional Results and Robustness Checks
I.a. Main Experimental Conditions


                                 n=413                                 n=175


                                                      ***
                                         ***                      **


                         n=205                        n=171                    n=212


Figure OA.1: Closeness broken down by own opinion about Trump and being matched based on the partner’s
opinion about Trump. All adjacent bars are compared. Absence of significance stars ) p-values > 0.05.
                                  ***                                            ***
                            ***                                                         ***


                    n=145         n=123         n=145               n=60         n=48         n=67


                                   ***                                           ***
                            **            ***                              **


Figure OA.2: Closeness and behavior broken down by own opinion about Trump and being matched based on the
partner’s opinion about Trump. All adjacent bars are compared. Absence of significance stars ) p-values > 0.05.
I.b. Minimal Group Paradigm Conditions


                             ***           **


                     n=133         n=137        n=123               n=71         n=53         n=57


Figure OA.3: Closeness and behavior broken down by own opinion about Trump and being matched based the
partner’s painting preference. All adjacent bars are compared. Absence of significance stars ) p-values > 0.05.
II. Experiment 2: Additional Results and Robustness Checks
Main Experimental Conditions


                                    ***                                           ***
                              ***          **                               ***          **


                      n=127         n=94        n=123                n=72         n=48        n=53


                                    ***                                           **
                              ***          **                               ***


                                    ***                                     ***


Figure OA.4: Closeness, belief, and behavior broken down by own opinion about and being matched based on the
partner’s opinion about Trump. All adjacent bars are compared. Absence of significance stars ) p-values > 0.05.
III. Experiment 3: Additional Results and Robustness Checks
III.a. Dictator Game


                                                  n=162                                                        n=162


                                                   n=70                                                         n=70


Figure OA.5: Norm perceptions for leaving initial split as is conditional on own and matched partner’s Trump
opinion. All adjacent quadrants are tested and statistical significance (if either ***p<0.01 or **p<0.05) is indicated
where applicable. Very Socially Inappropriate (VSI), Somewhat Socially Inappropriate (SSI), Somewhat Socially
Appropriate (SSA), and Very Socially Appropriate (VSA).
III.b. Public Goods Game
                                                                ***


                                                      n=232                                                     n=232
***


                                                      n=232                                                     n=232


                                                                ***

Figure OA.6: Norm perceptions for ‘contribute nothing’ Conditional Cooperators with partners who have aligned
or contrary feelings towards Trump. All adjacent quadrants are tested and statistical significance (if either ***p<0.01
or **p<0.05) is indicated where applicable. Very Socially Inappropriate (VSI), Somewhat Socially Inappropriate
(SSI), Somewhat Socially Appropriate (SSA), and Very Socially Appropriate (VSA).
                                                     ***


                                             n=162                                            n=70
***


                                             n=162                                            n=70


                                                     ***


                                             n=162                                            n=70
***


                                                                                                     **


                                             n=162                                            n=70


Figure OA.7: Norm perceptions for ‘contribute nothing’ Conditional Cooperators conditional on own and matched
partner’s Trump opinion. All adjacent quadrants are tested and statistical significance (if either ***p<0.01 or
**p<0.05) is indicated where applicable. Very Socially Inappropriate (VSI), Somewhat Socially Inappropriate (SSI),
Somewhat Socially Appropriate (SSA), and Very Socially Appropriate (VSA).
IV. Experimental Screenshots

  All original experimental screenshots can be downloaded from: https://osf.io/tgku9/