Irish Political Studies


      ISSN: 0790-7184 (Print) 1743-9078 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/fips20


Everyday sentiment among unionists and
nationalists in a Northern Irish town

Stephanie Dornschneider & Jennifer Todd

To cite this article: Stephanie Dornschneider & Jennifer Todd (2020): Everyday sentiment
among unionists and nationalists in a Northern Irish town, Irish Political Studies, DOI:
10.1080/07907184.2020.1743023

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/07907184.2020.1743023


       Published online: 09 Apr 2020.


       Submit your article to this journal


       Article views: 20


       View related articles


       View Crossmark data


                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fips20


IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES
https://doi.org/10.1080/07907184.2020.1743023


Everyday sentiment among unionists and nationalists
in a Northern Irish town
Stephanie Dornschneidera and Jennifer Toddb
a
 School of Politics & International Relations (SPIRe), University College Dublin, Newman
Building Belﬁeld, Dublin, Ireland; bGeary Institute University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin,
Ireland


    ABSTRACT
    Unionists and nationalists remain polarized in their political choices, increasingly
    so since Brexit. Does this signal increasing and dangerous division? Or have the
    decades of peace and agreed institutions changed the tenor of discussion in
    Northern Ireland? In this article, we examine the ways community relations,
    political division and contention are discussed by focusing on the expression
    of everyday sentiment among unionists and nationalists in a mixed Northern
    Irish town. Theoretically, it has been argued that positive sentiment raises
    hopes for compromise and leaves room for discussion, while negative
    sentiment closes oﬀ deliberation and compromise. Based on interviews, we
    ﬁrst conduct a sentiment analysis that identiﬁes positive versus negative
    sentiment expressed by the respondents, focusing on themes addressing Irish
    unity, unionism, Brexit, as well as personal and community life. The analysis
    shows that, on average, interviewees talk more positively than negatively
    about each theme. We then conduct a qualitative discourse analysis to
    investigate how positive and negative sentiment are expressed by unionist
    and nationalist respondents. We ﬁnd that respondents name and elaborate
    on the political issues in contention while lowering the emotional valence of
    discussion. This suggests much more room for deliberation and compromise
    than is usually assumed.


KEYWORDS Sentiment analysis; unionist; nationalist; Northern Ireland; positive sentiment; compromise;
avoidance; Brexit; united Ireland


Introduction
How has the tenor of daily interaction and everyday political relations in
Northern Ireland been aﬀected by the socio-political transformations of the
last decades? We know that some of the hopes surrounding the Good
Friday Agreement have now faded, and that unionists and nationalists
remain polarized in their political choices and increasingly so since Brexit.
But has the experience of peace and settlement over two decades produced

CONTACT Stephanie Dornschneider             stephanie.dornschneider@ucd.ie   School of Politics & International Relations (SPIRe), University College Dublin, Newman Building Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland
© 2020 Political Studies Association of Ireland


2      S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


a popular capacity to manage divisive issues? How does political division
impact at the personal level, and how does personal feeling inform political
division? The questions are particularly pertinent at a period when political
polarization has increased and when – whatever the outcome of Brexit –
new political choices will arise for nationalists and unionists and others alike.
   The survey results give a mixed answer. On the one hand, since the 1990s
there has been an increase in the percentage of ‘middle ground’ individuals,
neither Catholic nor Protestant, neither unionist nor nationalist, and often selfdescribed as Northern Irish (see Garry, 2016; Hayward & McManus, 2019).
There was an initial moderation of views even among once-extreme parties
and their supporters (Mitchell, Evans, & O’Leary, 2009) but since 2012 there
has been an increase in hard-line views amongst unionists.1 There is, in
short, some ground for hope that divisions are ameliorating. Just how
much, and whether the recent period of more permeable boundaries and
more open identities is but one phase in a ‘concertina eﬀect’ of sequential
opening and closure is not yet clear. Exploring the role of sentiment helps
us see if there is indeed potential to sustain and expand on openness and
permeability.
   Our aims in this article are modest. We do not analyse continuing social and
political division and its causes, but rather we explore and analyse how ordinary citizens talk about it. We do not explore issues of categorization, stigmatization and ‘othering’, which are directly if complexly linked to political
division.2 Rather we explore the emotional valence (sentiment) that respondents attach to their discourse. This, as we show below, is relevant to the question of how respondents manage existing divisions, whether by ameliorating
or intensifying them, avoiding or reﬂecting on them.
   In order to see how ordinary citizens experience their situation and talk
about divisive issues, we conducted a set of open-ended interviews in late
2018–2019 in a town in Mid-Ulster and its hinterland of villages. This is a
mixed area with a changing demography and an increasing Catholic and
nationalist majority. It is polarized in voting patterns and has recently experienced local contention over ﬂags.3 The interviews focused on local social
relations and included discussion of issues in political contention, in particular,
Brexit and a united Ireland. We applied sentiment analysis to examine the
interview transcripts for positive versus negative aﬀect expressed by the interviewees when talking about these issues. We further investigated the results
with qualitative analysis of the ways respondents addressed contentious
issues.
   While computerized methods of accessing feeling have not been used
before in analysing interviews in Northern Ireland, there is a substantive literature on feeling and political conﬂict, both in general and in Northern Ireland,
which we discuss in the next section. In the third section we discuss data construction, in the fourth we discuss the method of sentiment analysis and in the


                                                     IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES    3


ﬁfth its results. In the following section, we deepen our analysis by applying
discourse analysis to a subset of the interviews. We conclude by summarizing
our argument and outlining the questions that it raises for future research.


Emotion, conﬂict and the management of social interaction
Emotions are important phenomena in protracted conﬂict and in episodes of
violence (Bar-Tal, 2013; Petersen, 2012). Positive emotions have been associated with a willingness to undertake risky and project-oriented action
(Dornschneider, 2019), and negative emotions, in particular ontological insecurity and anxiety, with an inability to negotiate and compromise (Abulof,
2015; Rumelili, 2015). Negative emotions might be expected to be particularly
important in contemporary Northern Ireland, since demographic change and
geopolitical instability with Brexit has refocused attention on key features of
the Good Friday Agreement of 1998 and has reopened the question of Irish
unity. In this diﬃcult environment, whether ordinary people have positive
feelings and are able to reﬂect upon once-taboo views, or whether their attitudes are negatively charged and defensive, is likely partially to determine
their political responses.
    Several studies have focused on the feelings of people in contemporary
Northern Ireland: work on loyalism (McAuley, 2016) and on ex-paramilitaries
(Mitchell, 2015) argues that negative ontological insecurity explains why
these groups tend towards hard-line politics. There is evidence that some sections of the Protestant population have negative feelings towards the political
culture associated with the Good Friday Agreement, which they feel negates
the value of their own past (Daly, 2019; Simpson, 2009). Meanwhile, research
on Catholics suggests a move away from a negative ‘victim’ mentality since
the Good Friday Agreement (Mitchell, 2006, pp. 105–108).4 Psychological
studies in Northern Ireland suggest that exposure to violence in the past
increases group identiﬁcation in the present with related negative feeling
towards the Other, while cross-community contact has mixed eﬀects.5
There is also high politicization of negative feelings especially among loyalists
(see Nolan et al., 2014; and the focus group discussions in Daly, 2019). The
research reported here adds to the literature on emotion in Northern
Ireland and points to both parallels and diﬀerences between the communities.
    There is also a very substantive sociological literature showing how people
use feeling in everyday life to manage and reproduce division. One traditional
repertoire, going back at least to the 1950s, is avoidance of negative contentious topics and a focus on areas of agreement and good feeling in everyday
interaction (Harris, 1972, pp. 146–148). This removes political views from critical discussion, while allowing civil personal interaction together with proxy
political opposition. For example, people in Northern Ireland consistently
express a strong ‘happiness’ quotient, and this good feeling preexisted and


4      S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


persisted through the years of violence.6 It is thus diﬃcult to assess the functioning of positive sentiment in daily interaction. Does it show a disconnect
between everyday interaction and political division, such that ordinary citizens are much more open to compromise and reconciliation than are politicians?7 Or does it show that everyday sectarianism and opposition are
routinely disguised by positive statements and good feeling?8 Or are both
claims true? For example, do ordinary citizens consistently try to move
beyond opposition and equally consistently fail?9
    Thus two outstanding questions are raised by the literature:

 (i) How much negative or positive sentiment is shown in discussion of everyday
     life in Northern Ireland? The literature on ontological insecurity discussed
     above would lead us to expect considerable negative sentiment particularly in times of instability and change. The literature on the political construction of group identity would suggest, on the contrary, that we would
     ﬁnd considerably more positive feeling amongst ordinary people than we
     ﬁnd in political discourse.
(ii) How does positive sentiment function with respect to political division? Does
     it counter its negative eﬀects, as much psychological literature suggests?
     Does it bypass politically contentious topics, as much sociological literature suggests, thus functioning to insulate political views from everyday
     dialogue and to disguise opposition?

   Our analysis of the interviews allows an assessment of these conﬂicting
claims. It allows us to:

(iii) Assess the mix of positive and negative sentiment on diﬀerent themes and
      the patterns of sentiment. For example:
     (a) Is positive sentiment on issues of social relations related to positive
         sentiment on political issues?
     (b) Are there diﬀerences in the shares of positive and negative sentiments
         between themes?

   When positive or negative sentiment is found in everyday discourse,
further questions arise as to its signiﬁcance: for example, whether it functions
to avoid issues in political dispute or to open up discussion of them. In late
2018, issues in political contention included Brexit; unionism (and symbolic
politics of ﬂags and recognition); and a united Ireland. We assessed the interview transcripts qualitatively to ask:

(iv) How does positive (and/or negative) sentiment function in everyday discourse about political issues? For example:
    (a) Does it avoid contentious issues, or open discussion of them?


                                                   IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES    5


  (b) Is it associated with a willingness to compromise on contentious issues,
      or an unwillingness to compromise?
  (c) Does this diﬀer between unionists and nationalists?

Data construction
Xtown
Xtown is a mid-Ulster market town of about 9,000 residents, an educational
and business centre for a wider region of about 45,000 inhabitants. Like
other areas West of the Bann, the demographic balance in the town has
changed from majority Protestant to majority Catholic (in 2011, the population of the town was approximately 60% Catholic and 35% Protestant),
and from a unionist-controlled council to a nationalist-controlled one. The
town has long had a local reputation as a mixed town, with signiﬁcant integration in the school system, while the surrounding area is a patchwork of
all-Protestant and (almost) all-Catholic villages. There has been a history of
violence, with strong IRA and UVF organization in the neighbouring villages
and numerous murders and incidents of violence and repression, and
several bombs in the town centre which killed civilians and destroyed buildings. The wider region is divided nationally: in 2011, 27% of the residents had
British national identity only, whereas 39% had Irish national identity only,
while 24% had Northern Irish national identity only. Politically, the dominant
parties are Sinn Féin and the DUP, with minority voting for the SDLP; in the
most recent local elections no councillors from the cross-community Alliance
Party of Northern Ireland or from the Ulster Unionist Party were elected.


The sample and the interviews
We interviewed 13 individuals in the town and surrounding villages in December 2018, of whom seven identiﬁed as Protestant and six as Catholic (see Table
1). There was a mix of nationalists and unionists, with a few respondents who
identiﬁed as neither: nationalists were generally moderate, and did not
include self-declared republicans; unionists included DUP voters but not
DUP activists. There were seven respondents over 60 years old, ﬁve respondents in their 40s or 50s, and only one in their 20s; eight respondents were
male and ﬁve female, with a mix of white collar working class, small business,
farming and professional respondents. In spite of the small number of interviewees, our ﬁndings oﬀer new and surprising insight about sentiment
expressed in conversations about contested issues. These ﬁndings could be
investigated further by other studies in related settings.
    The interview schedule was open-ended, with a particular focus on the
individual, and his/her social relations; the town and social relations within
it; and political issues. Most interviews lasted between one and three hours,


6        S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


Table 1. Interviewees.
Number     Sex      Age        Religion                           Job                            Code24
1        Male        47       Protestant   Professional, ﬁnancial services                      SM2PWP01
2        Female      26       Catholic     Professional, culture and the arts                   SF3PWC02
3        Male        67       Catholic     Small businessman                                    SM1BWC03
4        Female      79       Catholic     Retired lower white-collar worker                    SF1WWC04
5        Male     Early 50s   Protestant   Service sector, middle class                         JM2SWP05
6        Female   Early 50s   Catholic     Public service sector, middle class                  JF2SWC06
7        Female      66       Protestant   Retired white collar working class, service sector   JF1WWP07
8        Male     Early 70s   Protestant   Large farmer                                         JM1FWP08
9        Male        89       Protestant   Retired small businessman                            JM1BWP09
10       Female      80       Protestant   Retired small businesswoman                          JF1BWP10
11       Male     Early 70s   Catholic     Small farmer                                         JM1FWC11
12       Male        45       Protestant   Professional, business                               JM2PWP12
13       Male     Late 40s    Catholic     Service sector, middle class                         JM2PWC13


with two shorter and one longer. Both authors conducted interviews and each
interview was attended by one interviewer only. One interviewer was perceived as an outsider, and the other as part-insider, part-outsider. All interviews followed Spradley’s guidelines for ethnographic interviews
(Spradley, 1979). We began interviews by introducing ourselves and our
research project. Then we typically asked individuals to introduce themselves
to us. Most interviewees responded by giving detailed descriptions of their
lives. We did not interrupt these descriptions, and instead nodded or repeated
words whenever individuals paused. In later parts of the interviews, we asked
individuals to elaborate more on life in their town at present and in the past,
private issues, future prospects, as well as other political themes discussed in
the analysis.


Analysis
Sentiment analysis
To analyse the interview transcripts, we ﬁrst applied sentiment analysis. Sentiment analysis is a subﬁeld of natural language processing that can be applied
to extract aﬀect from text. To date, relatively few studies have applied sentiment analysis to interview transcripts, perhaps because sentiment analysis is a
relatively new method and not yet known widely among researchers conducting interviews. In contrast, various studies have applied sentiment analysis to
social media text when analysing the stock market or voting behaviour (e.g.
Bollen, Mao, & Zeng, 2011; Tumasjan, Sprenger, Sandner, & Welpe, 2010). To
the best of our knowledge, sentiment analysis has not yet been applied to
study conﬂict in Northern Ireland.
   Our analysis applied VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner), which is publicly available through Python. VADER has been applied to
identify sentiment from texts including newspaper editorials, movie reviews,


                                                      IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES    7


social media communication, or product reviews (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014, p.
216). VADER identiﬁes sentiment by an empirically validated lexicon that contains a list of lexical features assigned to positive or negative values, and rules
that capture the grammar and syntax underlying expressions of sentiment
intensity (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014). The lexical features contained by this
lexicon include words and anything else that can be used for textual communication (e.g. LOL in social media text).
    In total, VADER’s dictionary includes 7,500 lexical features based on wellknown validated sentiment lexicons (e.g. the Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count dictionary and the Aﬀective Norms for English Words provide lists of
words and their aﬀect). In VADER, each lexical feature is assigned a sentiment
score (positive, negative or neutral) ranging from −4 to + 4. For instance, the
sentiment score of the word ‘okay’ is positive, 0.9, while the score of the word
‘horrible’ is negative, −2.5 (Hutto & Gilbert, 2014, p. 220). Subsequently, for
each of the three sentiment polarities, the Python implementation calculates
the sum of absolute sentiment scores across all words in a sentence. These
polarity scores are then rescaled such that the total polarity is 1 and the
scores can be interpreted as the relative proportions of the sentence that
are either negative, positive, or neutral. Appendix 1 provides the scores for
sentences corresponding to each theme we analysed.
    When assigning sentiment scores, VADER also evaluates the context of
lexical features. The creators of VADER give the following example to illustrate
this feature: ‘At ﬁrst glance, the contract looks good, but there’s a catch’ contains a negative sentiment for the word ‘catch,’ whereas ‘The ﬁsherman plans
to sell his catch at the market’ has a neutral sentiment for the same word
(Hutto & Gilbert, 2014, p. 218, italics in original). To capture these diﬀerences,
VADER applies a Python package that implements sentiment classiﬁcation
including disambiguation of word-sense. Nevertheless, VADER does not
capture subtle nuances of language. The second part of this article therefore
applies qualitative methods to further investigate particular excerpts from the
interviews.
    In the following analysis, we apply VADER’s polarity score method to identify proportions of texts that are positive, negative, and neutral. We apply this
method to interview segments about key themes, rather than entire interview
transcripts.10
    To prepare the transcripts for the sentiment analysis, we broke our interview transcripts into text segments about 14 key themes:

.   Community relations in this town
.   Community relations in other towns
.   Self-other
.   Brexit
.   Irish unity


8       S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


.   Unionism
.   Politicians
.   Personal life at present
.   Personal life in the past
.   Life in this town present
.   Life in this town past
.   Life in other towns present
.   Life in other towns past
.   Future prospects

   We identiﬁed these themes from our interview questions, interview notes,
and preliminary examination of interview transcripts. In total, we chose 13
themes that were addressed by most of the interviews.11
   We used VADER to identify the positive, negative, and neutral proportions
of each interview segment addressing a theme. This provided insight about
the sentiments expressed during our interviews.


Findings
Overview
The analysis shows that, on average, the interviewees talked more positively
than negatively about each theme (Figure 1). Examples of the VADER scores
for particular sentences are given in Appendix 1 below.
   The most positive theme identiﬁed by the analysis was ‘life in other towns
at present,’ whereas the least positive theme was ‘life in this town in the past’
(Figure 2).12 The most negative theme was ‘future prospects,’ whereas the
least negative theme was ‘unionism’ (Figure 3). The analysis of individuals
showed that, on average, for each interviewer, all except two interviewees
talked more positively than negatively about the themes investigated by
the analysis (Figure 4).13
   Irish unity was the second most positively addressed theme by the interviews. When talking about Irish unity, interviewees expressed almost three
times more positive than negative sentiment. Strikingly, unionists who
opposed Irish unity were on average more likely to express positive than
negative sentiment about it. Unionism was also addressed more positively
than negatively. Interviewees expressed twice more positive than negative
sentiment when talking about unionism. Strikingly, nationalists in the
sample were on average as positive about unionism as were unionists.
Almost all of the respondents expressed more positive than negative sentiment about Brexit, including those most opposed to it politically.
   Politicians were also addressed more positively than negatively. Interviewees expressed twice as much positive sentiment as negative sentiment
when discussing politicians (Figure 1).


                                                       IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES   9


Figure 1. Averages of positive and negative values by theme.

    Regarding themes about personal life, interviewees also expressed more
positive than negative sentiment. Personal life at present was the fourth
most positive theme identiﬁed by the analysis (Figure 2), and interviewees
expressed more than twice as much positive as negative sentiment when
talking about this theme (Figure 1). When discussing their personal life in
the past, individuals expressed less positive sentiment. Nevertheless,
expressions of positive sentiment were more frequent than expressions of
negative sentiment when discussing this theme.
    Regarding themes about community relations and life in their town, interviewees expressed more positive than negative sentiment. Life in this town at
present was the third most positive theme identiﬁed by the analysis (Figure 2),
and interviewees expressed more than twice as much positive as negative
sentiment when addressing this theme (Figure 1). Life in this town in the
past was discussed less positively. It had the lowest positive sentiment
scores and the second highest negative sentiment scores. Nevertheless, individuals still expressed more positive than negative sentiment when discussing
this theme. Moreover, the theme of community relations in this town had
more than twice as many expressions of positive as negative sentiment.
    Examples of comments on particular themes are given in Appendix 2. Many
of the speciﬁc beliefs were common between Protestant and Catholic, unionist and nationalist respondents. For example, on the issue of Irish unity, almost
all respondents – those who did and those who did not favour it – mentioned
its potential costs. These included: loss of UK beneﬁts, increased social divisions and civil unrest, and economic consequences. Several were concerned


10      S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


Figure 2. Averages of positive values by theme.

to know more about the South, what Southerners wanted, and one was interested in how the Protestant minority in the South had fared since independence. We interviewed neither young hard-liners nor the younger people
who radically detach from traditional identities but, that apart, the respondents represented a wide range of mainstream opinion.


Preliminary conclusions
The ﬁnding that interviewees expressed more positive than negative sentiment about each theme contributes knowledge about Northern Ireland.
The ﬁnding may seem paradoxical, because it does not show any change in
opposed political positions and thus conﬂict – which appears ‘negative’ –
remains, even while the positions are expressed with predominantly neutral
or positive sentiment. But this is not a contradiction: sentiment analysis
measures only sentiment expressed, not whether statements express conﬂicting views. It is not that the respondents have resolved conﬂict, or become
reconciled to opposing standpoints, but that they have changed the
emotional valence of their discussion of contentious topics.
   The literature on emotions and conﬂict suggests that ‘the presence of particular negative sentiments and/or the absence of particular positive and
moral sentiments can constitute a barrier to conﬂict resolution and reconciliation’ (Kahn, Liberman, Halperin, & Ross, 2016, p. 61). In particular, negative
emotions of hatred and continuing anger have been considered a barrier,
whereas positive emotions of empathy or compassion have been related to


                                                       IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES   11


Figure 3. Averages of negative values by themes.


Figure 4. Averages of positive and negative values by individual.


reconciliation (Kahn et al., 2016, p. 61; also see Halperin & Pliskin, 2015). Both
anger and empathy can play ‘a mediating role’ in conﬂict, and they can be
determined by attributional thinking about the intentionality and cause of
an action (Betancourt & Blair, 1992, p. 343). Achieving reconciliation can


12      S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


moreover ‘reduce anxiety and uncertainty in the recipient of aggression following a conﬂict’ (Aureli, 1997, p. 315).
   Although our study did not examine particular emotions, the ﬁnding that
our interviewees expressed more positive than negative sentiment is signiﬁcant. According to the literature, this ﬁnding suggests that some of the
emotional barriers to reconciliation and conﬂict resolution have been lifted.
The consistency of the ﬁnding between individuals from Protestant and
Catholic background and of unionist and nationalist politics is surprising in
light of the literature that shows that sections of unionism are particularly
troubled by the new politics of Northern Ireland. It shows a diﬀerent repertoire
than that of the increasingly vocal hard-line unionists who emphasize negative emotions; our respondents may have agreed with the political choices
of their political parties, but they express them in ways that are potentially
open to dialogue.
   Our ﬁndings on Brexit are similarly surprising. The literature has connected
Brexit to global competition (Colantone & Stanig, 2018), social division
(Hobolt, 2016), and populist movements (Inglehart & Norris, 2016), and in
Northern Ireland as a threat to peace and settlement (Phinnemore &
Hayward, 2017). Given the challenges that Brexit poses for intergroup interactions, these ﬁndings suggest that interviewees would express strong negative emotions about Brexit, particularly given the negative emotions
surrounding public discussions of economic competition, threat by immigrants, social inequalities, or undermining of the Good Friday Agreement
of 1998. However, our ﬁndings suggest that, on average, individuals
talked about Brexit without strong negative emotion, and indeed
showing positive sentiment, including those most opposed politically to
Brexit and who stand most to lose by it, and who would move south in
the case a hard Brexit.14 This seemingly paradoxical ﬁnding does not
show any change in the deep opposition of some respondents to Brexit;
rather it shows the capacity to speak about it without highly charged negative sentiment.
   Most surprisingly of all, a united Ireland was discussed more positively than
negatively, including by unionists who would ‘always’ be opposed to it and
who would consider leaving Northern Ireland to move to Great Britain if it
were to come about.15 It is generally considered that unionists perceive a
united Ireland as the greatest possible threat to their very being, one which
they want to avoid at all costs, and which many would ﬁght to prevent (see
Whyte, 1991, p. 80; Shirlow, Tonge, & McAuley, 2012). If they are now able
to discuss it with positive emotion, this suggests that a threshold has been
passed among sections of mainstream unionists, for whom the constitutional
issue no longer immediately evokes zero-sum identity politics and overwhelming negative emotions. It is important to keep in mind this segment


                                                   IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES    13


of unionist society rather than treating the rhetoric of unionist leaders and
unionist extremes as representative.16


The functioning of sentiment
Qualitative analysis
The sentiment analysis does not tell us what kind of positive or negative
sentiments were expressed, how sentiment was expressed about particular
themes, and how it functioned discursively particularly amongst respondents with strong unionist or nationalist views. We therefore undertook
qualitative analysis of interviews with four individuals who expressed
strong political views – two unionists and two nationalists – in order to
show how they conceptually framed the political issues in contention.
We address the paradox in which strong oppositional political views are
expressed with more positive than negative sentiment, and ask if this positive sentiment is a way of avoiding recognition of the depth of opposition,
or of opening up opposing views to discussion. We ask: (i) how are strong
political views expressed, in what language and with what tropes?; (ii) how
far are the political issues in contention avoided or, alternatively, opened
for discussion; and (iii) how far is there a symmetry in modes of expression
and avoidance between unionists and nationalists? We focus particularly on
issues which are in general contention: in particular Brexit; a united Ireland;
and issues of symbolic politics.


Nationalist constructions of political opposition
Two moderate nationalists – Peter (in his early 70s, a small farmer in the hills
outside Xtown) and Eoin (in his 40s, service sector in the Xtown region) – are
strongly opposed to Brexit, and feel that DUP policy is misguided and counterproductive.17 Despite their political views, the sentiment analysis showed that
they expressed more positive than negative sentiment about Brexit; and while
Eoin expresses positive and negative sentiment about unionism in equal
measure, Peter expresses no negative sentiment at all about unionism.
   Qualitative reading shows that each raises the issues in political dispute
while voicing their criticisms gently. Peter expresses a strong wish not to
appear one-sided. ‘I don’t like saying it but our side seems to me more
open-minded.’ When the interviewer is critical of the unionist-dominated
security forces in the past, he immediately jumps to their defence: ‘But they
weren’t all bad.’ His strongest criticism of contemporary unionists is tinged
with sadness rather than anger: ‘But I think the DUP are living in the past
and it’s just the ﬂag and that seems to be as long as they can wave it
under our nose, that’s all that seems to matter.’


14        S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


  Eoin distances himself from unionist and British symbolic politics, but
expresses ‘fascination’ with it rather than anger or disdain:
     it’s this other thing that fascinates me, you know a soldier was shot and dies a
     hero and somebody who is deemed as being a terrorist is not. And one of them
     should be recognized and the other one shouldn’t. And here you can wear a
     poppy anywhere and if I was to go into work with an Easter lily on me I
     would probably get the sack.18

    It is not that he is neutral on the question: ‘I don’t see why it’s okay for
someone to wear a poppy and not okay for someone to wear an Easter lily
because the both of them are about memories’, but he relativizes his own
viewpoint ‘again maybe it’s where I sit … ’. Brexit stands to damage his
material well-being, as well as going against his political views, and a hard
Brexit would lead him to consider moving away from his home-place, about
which he is unconditionally positive, to the Republic of Ireland. Yet again he
is ‘puzzled’ and ‘does not understand’ rather than explicitly criticizing DUP
or British policy:
     Because like probably from the Good Friday Agreement up until now the
     average nationalist here has been quite content. You know? A hard Brexit
     could to me change that entirely and I don’t understand if you are on the
     pig’s back, able to play both markets and become a sort of a place that is
     very attractive for investment why you would be avoiding that, you know.

    Older nationalist tropes of unionists acting against their own interests are
used, but in gentle, detached and somewhat quizzical modes of expression
rather than in direct or angry discourse.
    In each case, a strong consciousness of group identity is expressed: ‘our
side’; ‘our nose’, ‘where I sit’. Each respondent holds strong political views
against Brexit, is concerned about the direction of contemporary unionist politics, and favours a united Ireland. Each, however, is willing to compromise on
political matters, and in particular on a united Ireland: Peter does not wish to
force it on unionists even if nationalists were in a majority, while Eoin points
out that nationalists were content within the United Kingdom until Brexit.
Where compromise is more diﬃcult is on the symbolic issues directly relating
to self-esteem: the waving of ﬂags, the equality of memories.
    The quotations above express the strongest criticisms of unionists that these
respondents make: they are highly qualiﬁed (‘I think’, ‘where I sit’, ‘seems to
me’), and emotions are constrained. For example, ﬂags are waved ‘under our
nose’ rather than the more emotive and invasive phrase ‘up our nose’. They
state views that they know unionists would disagree with and they state
beliefs that are important to them: they do so in ways that open these views
and beliefs to discussion. Although they are clear that conﬂict exists and
although they believe that the other side is diﬃcult, they phrase their views
in emotionally-light ways that permit rather than preclude discussion.


                                                          IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES         15


Unionist constructions of political opposition
Two unionists – Nathan (a prosperous large farmer in his early 70s living in a
predominantly republican village) and Karl (an upwardly mobile professional
in his 40s, from Xtown, now living some miles away) – diﬀer in their political
views from within the unionist political spectrum.19 Karl is strongly against
Brexit and Nathan strongly for it; Nathan does not have very strong views
about a united Ireland, while Karl is strongly opposed; Karl is highly reﬂective
on symbolic issues, while Nathan is more concerned with neighbourly interaction. Each expresses more positive than negative sentiment in their
interviews.
   Nathan keeps away from political activism, holding the traditionalist Protestant pietist view that one should get along with one’s neighbours while
respecting the laws of the state one is in (Ganiel, 2008, pp. 72–76). He and
his wife participate in local Catholic St Vincent de Paul outings, and he provides practical help to his nationalist neighbours. He does not want a
united Ireland but will not oppose it:
   It’s one of the things, we’re to respect the rulers of your country and that there
   but it’s going to change, I know it’s going to change and there’s ones that will
   ﬁght and ﬁght until the last breath, I’ll not be one of those. When the time
   comes and it’s switched over, and it will come, I have no doubt about it. But I
   would like it to come decently without shooting and bombings because that
   doesn’t help anybody.

   Speaking of the politics of Brexit, the backstop and a united Ireland, he
says: ‘I can understand these loyalist people, it’s a stepping stone to the
Republic. What odds, we’re going to go anyway, we may as well go tomorrow
as the next day, that’s the way I look at it.’ He shows a capacity to understand
the views of the ‘other side’: when asked about past violence, about which he
is very conscious, he talks about the murder of a local Catholic by loyalists:
‘There was that man … he was murdered, a cruel, cruel, cruel death.’ He
speaks of the ‘awful’ diﬃculty of going into houses in mourning to pay his
respects, before talking warmly about the man who was killed and their
shared interests in local aﬀairs. Recent literature shows the importance of
the concept of a ‘victim’ in some contemporary unionist thought and politics
(Lawther, 2014; Nagle, 2009; Simpson, 2009). Nathan shares the consciousness
of past violence, but it is signiﬁcant that he focuses not on the killing of Protestants by the IRA but on the killing of a nationalist neighbour by loyalists.
   Nathan voted for Brexit and is unrepentant, despite the economic beneﬁts
of the EU for farmers like himself:
   Well, I’ll tell you why I voted to leave, the amount of money that Britain paid into
   Europe, we only got half of it back. And half of that money that did come back
   was put into things that I wouldn’t put it in … . Like you take even the Gaelic
   pitch there, they get a subsidy of £600,000, you know? … And I can understand


16         S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


     it because the Roman Catholic side, I have to give them their dues, they put it
     out and they can manage to get the money. Whereas the unionist side can’t
     get it.

   Here his strong sense of group identity is to the fore as he assesses the
balance of beneﬁts for both blocs.
   Karl is against Brexit, and also opposed to a united Ireland. He believes that
a Northern Ireland ‘backstop’ stands to beneﬁt the region signiﬁcantly, while
taking seriously the argument that it brings a united Ireland closer:
     Like I think there’s big beneﬁts, because you can set yourself up as like a stepping stone and everything goes through Northern Ireland and it would be brilliant for Northern Ireland. But I can see the worry that … it’s a stepping stone to
     Dublin, so at the minute I wouldn’t mind if Northern Ireland had special rights as
     long as it doesn’t go any further than that, I don’t really care how permanent, I’m
     not too worried.

     He is against a united Ireland, emphasizing the economic rationale:
     I would probably always be against it. Not probably, I always would be against it,
     so I’d always want to remain part of the UK. But I would need to see how it would
     aﬀect us, whether I’d move … I’ve always had this opinion, well we’ve always
     been told that Ireland couldn’t aﬀord us, so the UK’s pumping so much
     money into it, Ireland can’t aﬀord to do that so we’re going to be worse oﬀ,
     like horrendously worse oﬀ.

   Karl takes seriously the daily symbolic interactions – linguistic signs, ﬂags,
jerseys, symbolism – that are what he calls ‘pain points’ for unionists. He is very
aware of the increasing public use of the Irish language in the area and is
relaxed about it: ‘Initially it would have wound me up. Not so much
anymore. I’ve sort of calmed over the years.’ He is annoyed by sports
jerseys that signify nationalist group identity:
     you would see loads of guys in like GAA tops and stuﬀ and to me that’s still one
     of the things that niggles me because if you run around in a Rangers top everybody looks at you and judges you.20

    He uses stronger language on the display of ﬂags: ‘it’s whenever you put a
Union Jack up in the middle of the town and someone complains, that pisses
me oﬀ, because it’s the ﬂag of the country’.
    Karl’s analysis of the ‘pain points’ which are particularly galling to unionists
is interesting. He expresses his negative sentiment in very understated terms –
‘winding up’ – and describes overcoming much of it. He does not avoid discussion of the political and symbolic issues in contention, but through his
language he lowers the emotional valence of potentially highly problematic
issues. Like Nathan, he shows clear capacity for political compromise on
some issues, not on all. Nathan does not overtly discuss symbolic issues in
contention, but his practice – including helping GAA neighbours and


                                                    IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES     17


participating in St Vincent de Paul activities – shows his capacity to bypass
symbolic contest for the sake of neighbourly goodwill. In each case the
emotional weight of highly emotive issues is lowered, feelings are described
in muted language, and there is an eﬀort to allow reciprocity. Politically unionists became more hard-line in the 2010s, but the discourse of these two unionist respondents shows that once-taboo topics are increasingly being opened
to reﬂexive discussion.
    Here again we chose the most critical and oppositional statements from
the respondents. In these statements, the respondents state their concerns
clearly and express deep meaning, but there is no strong expression of negative emotion: often they use terms that have low aﬀect (‘niggles me’), thus
opening the way to discussion while expressing their distinct perspectives.


Discussion
Seamus Heaney – from an area not too far from that of the respondents –
described in his poetry the ways Northern Irish discourse functioned to
avoid conﬂict and disguise views. Like Heaney himself and his own neighbours, our respondents were ‘expertly civil-tongued with civil neighbours’,
expressing their views gently and subtly – ‘smoke signals are loud compared
to us’.21 But rather than avoiding the issues in contention (‘whatever you say,
say nothing’), they stated their views on contentious issues clearly and quietly.
They have moved on from the dissimulation and avoidance behaviour so
typical of earlier decades in Northern Ireland. 22
   None of these respondents avoided key issues in contention. In all four of
these interviews, respondents showed considerable willingness to compromise on political issues, including a united Ireland. Where compromise was
impossible, none would ﬁght, but the younger respondents would leave
Northern Ireland. Compromise, however, was not thought appropriate on
issues of culture and symbolic status. Here nationalists emphasized the
need for respect, and unionists the pain of change.
   Of particular interest was the unionists’ direct discussion of a united Ireland
and of the ‘pain points’ associated with political change. These issues, which
for long have been thought of as impossible for unionists to consider, were
thought about and discussed by these and by the other unionist respondents.
Unionists spoke more directly about their feelings than did the nationalists,
perhaps a product of the asymmetry of situation: unionists have lost a position
of past cultural power (Ruane & Todd, 1996, pp. 178–203). Nationalists, who
have come close to achieving a position of cultural equality, were nonetheless
clear that they had diﬃculty in understanding unionist viewpoints. Perhaps
Eoin’s ‘fascination’ with unionists’ views, or Nathan’s commitment to acting
well for his neighbours, did not actually invite discussion with their political
counterpart, but there was no negative sentiment that would preclude it. If


18      S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


the respondents checked their emotions and held back on expressing negative feelings, they made clear their beliefs and preferences and their bottom
lines. That is enough for dialogue.
   Respondents’ quiet and positive style in interview did not always transfer to
actual debates. One Protestant respondent mentioned a heated argument
about Brexit among his extended family, with people shouting at each
other. The non-judgmental situation of the interview, insulated from everyday
aﬀairs, permits reﬂection and careful choice of words: it is unlike an extended
family lunch where old familial resentments and attempts at inﬂuence may be
common, and unlike unplanned street encounters or pub-talk. But dialogue
and debate typically take place in such structured and insulated contexts:
whether in small settings (the cross-community walks organized by one of
our respondents, or the local history society attended by another), or in
larger focus groups, ecumenical venues and citizens’ assemblies. Our respondents – including the mainstream unionists and nationalists whom we interviewed – showed considerable capacity for discussion, dialogue and
deliberation in such settings. It is sometimes assumed that contentious
topics – including Irish unity – should not be discussed because it would
only enrage unionists and incite nationalists. The respondents interviewed
here were well able to discuss the issues. They were not reconciled, nor was
conﬂict resolved, but they were suﬃciently reﬂexive to allow discussion
towards such resolution. Some of the emotional barriers to discussion, dialogue and resolution had been lifted. This is the modest but important conclusion of our study. Indeed, social, political and cultural obstacles to
resolution and reconciliation remain, and our study did not investigate
these, nor did it show how resolution of conﬂict can be found or what
should be the normative parameters of discussion. These are matters
beyond the scope of this article and this method of research.


Conclusion
A striking conclusion from our research is the dominance of positive over
negative sentiment in the interviews. The consistency of the ﬁnding across
individuals and thematic areas is important. Theoretically one might argue
that this shows a much greater capacity for dialogue, discussion, and reciprocal compromise than is usually believed.
   The functioning of sentiment was further analysed through a qualitative
reading of the interview transcripts to see if the discourse functioned to
open up or to avoid issues of political contention. We found that contentious
issues were named and discussed rather than avoided. We found signiﬁcant
although far from total willingness to compromise on some of these issues.
Perhaps most important, we found that even on the most divisive political
and symbolic issues, respondents systematically used language that lowered


                                                       IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES     19


the emotional valence of the issue and that permitted discussion of topics that
had in the past been very highly emotionally charged. As we have emphasized,
sentiment analysis does not measure opposing views, beliefs or aims, or the
implications of beliefs – on all of these dimensions, opposition remains.
   Was there still a level of avoidance in the language chosen? It may be that
political conﬂict can still evoke intense negative emotions that these respondents thought inappropriate to reveal in interview. Overtime comparison of
sentiment in interviews can hold steady the interview/interviewer factor
and let us assess whether or not there is more positivity and willingness to
compromise today than in the past. This is the topic of ongoing research by
the authors.
   The research reported here involved only a limited number of interviews
with the more moderate members of the main political blocs, in a mixed
town in which unionists were a minority. Our ongoing research aims to
broaden this study, ﬁrst with a comparison of interviews with respondents in
majority-unionist areas, and second with an overtime analysis. Even given the
limitations of the study, however, the ﬁndings are important and unexpected.
The unionist views are of particular interest: the unionists we spoke to were
mainstream and many of them had voted DUP. Yet they expressed positive sentiment, showed clear capacity to compromise on key issues, and were able to
discuss the issues on which they were unwilling to compromise. The qualitative
analysis shows that there are still many issues in contention, even between
these unionists and the moderate nationalists whom we interviewed. But it
also shows a much greater popular readiness for deliberation and dialogue
than is often thought. Most surprising of all is the willingness of these unionists
to talk about a united Ireland, once a taboo subject. This raises an important
political question as to how the potential for dialogue can be engaged.


Notes
  1. See Todd (2018, pp. 59–61); and Northern Ireland Life and Times, Politics
     Module,      FUTURE1      https://www.ark.ac.uk/nilt/results/polatt.html#conpref;
     accessed 02/06/2019.
  2. For comparative discussion of categorization and stigmatization and how cultural disrespect is expressed and is overcome, see Lamont et al. (2016); Todd
     (2018); for discussion in the Northern Ireland case, see Brewer (1998); Millar
     (2006); McManus (2017).
  3. In the 2019 local elections, residents voted overwhelmingly for Sinn Féin and
     Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) councillors, with minority Social Democratic
     and Labour Party (SDLP) representation.
  4. Also see Northern Ireland Life and Times, CULTRAD5 and CULTRAD6 https://
     www.ark.ac.uk/nilt/results/comrel.html#rel; accessed 02/06/2019.
  5. On exposure to violence, see Lowe and Muldoon (2010); for recent work on
     contact, trust and emotion, with speciﬁc Northern Irish references, see
     Hughes, Furey, and Jenkins (2011); Kenworthy et al. (2016).


20      S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


  6. Rose (1971, pp. 315–316); Rupert Neate (2018).
  7. This is the argument put forward by Robin Wilson (2010), following Brubaker
     (2002) and Brubaker, Fleishschmidt, Fox, and Grancea (2006). It is also consistent
     with the views of those who see sectarianism as a product of structure not
     culture (Gilligan, 2017), and who emphasise the everyday capacity to compromise (Irwin, 2002).
  8. This argument is put forward in many studies of sectarianism, including Leichty
     and Clegg (2001); Brewer (1998); Ganiel (2008); Millar (2006); McKay (2000).
  9. This argument is put forward by Todd (2018, pp. 191–193).
 10. This means that comparison with other interviews, conducted at other times,
     according to diﬀerent schedules, and for other purposes, is possible, since
     aﬀect is compared across themes rather than across whole interviews.
 11. Appendix 2 provides examples of statements for each theme.
 12. Other towns mentioned included London, Dublin, and other Irish, European and
     American as well as Northern Irish towns.
 13. The two respondents who on average expressed more negative than positive
     emotion were both Protestant and over 60; neither was politically hard-line.
     Qualitative assessment suggests diﬀerent reasons for the scores in each case:
     one respondent was explicitly worried about current politics and unsure
     about their future choices; in the other case, age may well have been a factor
     because they spoke very directly without evident concern – as seen in most
     of the other respondents – to monitor their discourse and choose their words
     carefully.
 14. JM2PWC13.
 15. JM2PWP12.
 16. In 2014, the last time the question was asked in the Northern Ireland Life and
     Times survey, 40% of those Protestants who support the union said they
     would be able to live with a united Ireland even if they did not like it and a
     further quarter would positively welcome a united Ireland achieved democratically. https://www.ark.ac.uk/nilt/2014/Political_Attitudes/FUTURE1.html.
 17. Respectively JM1FWC11 and JM2PWC13.
 18. The poppy is a British national symbol commemorating the war dead. The Easter
     lily is an Irish republican symbol commemorating those who fought and died in
     the 1916 rebellion.
 19. Respectively JM1FWP08 and JM2PWP12.
 20. It is primarily but not exclusively Catholics and nationalists who participate in the
     GAA (Gaelic Athletic Association), while Rangers is a Scottish soccer team supported by Protestants and strong loyalists in Northern Ireland and often associated with sectarian behaviour among supporters.
 21. The quotes are from Seamus Heaney’s poem ‘Whatever you say, say
     nothing’ (Heaney, 1975).
 22. On avoidance of contentious issues in cross-community discussion, see Harris
     (1972, 146–148).
 23. Table constructed by Sarah Curristan.
 24. A code was given to each, for example SF1WWC04, to ensure easy identiﬁcation
     of the interviewer (Stephanie), gender (F), generation (1 or eldest), locality (West
     of the Bann), economic sector (Working class) religion (Catholic) of the respondent, and a number representing each of this set of respondents (also used in
     Figure 4).


                                                           IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES        21


Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements to Sarah Curristan for excellent research assistance, and to DFAT
Reconciliation Fund for a grant that permitted interviewing, transcription and coding.


Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).


Notes on contributors
Stephanie Dornschneider, Assistant Professor in the School of Politics and International
Relations at University College Dublin, writes on violent and nonviolent resistance,
belief systems, and ethnographic interviews. Her recent articles include High-stakes
decision-making within complex social environments: A computational model of
belief systems in the Arab Spring (Cognitive Science, 2019) and Analyzing ethnographic
interviews: Three studies on terrorism and nonviolent resistance (International Political
Science Review, 2019).
Professor Jennifer Todd, MRIA is presently Research Director, Institute for British Irish
Studies, UCD, and writes on ethnicity, identity, conﬂict with special expertise on Northern Ireland. Her recent books include Identity change after conﬂict (2018, Springer/Palgrave), and, with John Coakley, Negotiating a settlement in Northern Ireland (Oxford UP,
2020).


References
Abulof, U. (2015). The mortality and morality of nations. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Aureli, F. (1997). Post-conﬂict anxiety in nonhuman primates: The mediating role of
   emotion in conﬂict resolution. Aggressive Behavior, 23(5), 315–328.
Bar-Tal, D. (2013). Intractable Conﬂicts: Socio-psychological foundations and dynamics.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Betancourt, H., & Blair, I. (1992). A cognition (attribution)-emotion model of violence in
   conﬂict situations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18(3), 343–350.
Bollen, J., Mao, H., & Zeng, X. (2011). Twitter mood predicts the stock market. Journal of
   Computational Science, 2(1), 1–8.
Brewer, J. (1998). Anti-Catholicism in Northern Ireland 1600–1998. London: Macmillan.
Brubaker, R. (2002). Ethnicity without groups. European Journal of Sociology, 43(2), 163–189.
Brubaker, R., Fleishschmidt, M., Fox, J., & Grancea, L. (2006). Nationalist politics and
   everyday ethnicity in a Transylvanian Town. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Colantone, I., & Stanig, P. (2018). Global competition and Brexit. American Political
   Science Review, 112(2), 201–218.
Daly, M. (2019, September 22). Unionist concerns and fears of a United Ireland.
   Retrieved from https://senatormarkdaly.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2019/07/unionistconcerns-fears-of-a-united-ireland-the-need-to-protect-the-peace-process-build-avision-for-a-shared-island-and-a-united-people.pdf
Dornschneider, S. (2019). High-stakes decision-making within complex social environments: A computational model of belief systems in the Arab spring. Cognitive
   Science, 43(7), e12762.


22       S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


Ganiel, G. (2008). Evangelicalism and conﬂict in Northern Ireland. Basingstoke: Palgrave
   Macmillan.
Garry, J. (2016). Consociation and voting in Northern Ireland. Philadelphia: University of
   Pennsylvania Press.
Gilligan, C. (2017). Northern Ireland and the crisis of anti-racism: Rethinking racism and
   sectarianism. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Halperin, E., & Pliskin, R. (2015). Emotions and emotion regulation in intractable conﬂict:
   Studying emotional processes within a unique context. Political Psychology, 36(1),
   119–150.
Harris, R. (1972). Prejudice and tolerance in ulster: A study of neighbours and ‘strangers’ in
   a border community. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Hayward, K., & McManus, C. (2019). Neither/nor: The rejection of unionist and nationalist identities in post-agreement Northern Ireland. Capital and Class, 43(1), 139–155.
Heaney, S. (1975). North. London: Faber and Faber.
Hobolt, S. B. (2016). The Brexit vote: A divided nation, a divided continent. Journal of
   European Public Policy, 23(9), 1259–1277.
Hughes, J. E., Furey, A., & Jenkins, R. (2011). Contact, trust and social capital in Northern
   Ireland: A qualitative study of three mixed communities. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 34
   (6), 967–985.
Hutto, C. J., & Gilbert, E. (2014). Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment
   analysis of social media text. In Eighth international AAAI conference on weblogs and
   social media (pp. 216–225). Retrieved from https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/
   ICWSM/ICWSM14/paper/viewPaper/8109
Inglehart, R. F., & Norris, P. (2016). Trump, Brexit, and the Rise of Populism: Economic
   Have-nots and Cultural Backlash. Working paper, RWP16-026. Faculty Research
   Working Paper Series. Harvard Kennedy School.
Irwin, C. (2002). The people’s peace process in Northern Ireland. Houndsmills. Basingstoke:
   Palgrave Macmillan.
Kahn, D. T., Liberman, V., Halperin, E., & Ross, L. (2016). Intergroup sentiments, political
   identity, and their inﬂuence on responses to potentially ameliorative proposals in
   the context of an intractable conﬂict. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, 60(1), 61–88.
Kenworthy, J. B., Voci, A., Al Ramiah, A., Tausch, N., Hughes, J., & Hewstone, M. (2016).
   Building trust in a postconﬂict society. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, 60(6), 1041–
   1070.
Lamont, M., Moraes Silva, G., Welburn, J., Guetzkow, J., Mizrachi, N., Herzog, H., & Reis, E.
   (2016). Getting respect: Responding to stigmatization and discrimination. Princeton:
   Princeton University Press.
Lawther, C. (2014). Truth, denial and transition: Northern Ireland and the contested past.
   London: Routledge.
Leichty, J., & Clegg, C. (2001). Moving beyond sectarianism: Religion, conﬂict and reconciliation in Northern Ireland. Dublin: Columbia Press.
Lowe, R. D., & Muldoon, O. (2010). Religious and ethno-national identiﬁcation and political violence. Ethnopolitics, 9(1), 71–83.
McAuley, J. (2016). Very British rebels? The culture and politics of ulster loyalism. London:
   Bloomsbury.
McKay, S. (2000). Northern protestants: An unsettled people. Belfast: Blackstaﬀ.
McManus, C. P. (2017). Dealing with the legacy of ethnic conﬂict: Confronting ‘othering’
   through transformative adult education—A Northern Ireland case study.
   Ethnopolitics, 16(4), 411–429.


                                                           IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES        23


Millar, A. (2006). Socio-ideological fantasy and the Northern Ireland conﬂict: The other
  side. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Mitchell, A. (2015). Ontological (in)security and violent peace in Northern Ireland. In B.
  Rumelili (Ed.), Conﬂict resolution and ontological security: Peace anxieties (pp. 99–116).
  London: Routledge.
Mitchell, C. (2006). Religion, identity and politics in Northern Ireland: Boundaries of
  belonging and belief. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Mitchell, P., Evans, G., & O’Leary, B. (2009). Extremist outbidding in ethnic party systems
  is not inevitable: Tribune parties in Northern Ireland. Political Studies, 57(2), 397–421.
Nagle, J. (2009). The ulster unionist victims’ movement: Political opportunities and
  injustice masterframes. Irish Journal of Sociology, 17(1), 19–37.
Nolan, P., Bryan, D., Dwyer, C., Hayward, K., Radford, K., & Shirlow, P. (2014). The ﬂag
  dispute: Anatomy of a protest. Queen’s University Belfast Institute for the Study of
  conﬂict Transformation and Social Justice. Retrieved from http://pure.qub.ac.uk/
  portal/ﬁles/13748797/The_Flag_Dispute_report_PRINTED.pdf
Petersen, R. D. (2012). Understanding ethnic violence: Fear, hatred and resentment in
  twentieth century Eastern Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Phinnemore, D., & Hayward, K. (2017). UK withdrawal (Brexit) and the good Friday
  agreement. Retrieved from http://www.europarl.europa.eu/supporting-analyses
Rose, R. (1971). Governing Without consensus: An Irish perspective. London: Faber and
  Faber.
Ruane, J., & Todd, J. (1996). Dynamics of conﬂict in Northern Ireland. Power conﬂict and
  emancipation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rumelili, B. (2015). Ontological (in)security and peace anxieties: A framework for
  conﬂict resolution. In B. Rumelili (Ed.), Conﬂict resolution and ontological security:
  Peace anxieties (pp. 10–29). London: Routledge.
Rupert, Neate. (2018, September 27). Northern Ireland scores high in life satisfaction
  and happiness ratings. Irish Times. Retrieved from https://www.irishtimes.com/lifeand-style/health-family/northern-irelandscores-high-in-life-satisfaction-and-happinessratings-1.3643332
Shirlow, P., Tonge, J., & McAuley, J. (2012). Abandoning historical conﬂict: Former political
  prisoners and reconciliation in Northern Ireland. Manchester: Manchester University
  Press.
Simpson, K. (2009). Unionist voices and the politics of remembering the past in Northern
  Ireland. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Spradley, J. P. (1979). The ethnographic interview. Long Grove: Waveland Press.
Todd, J. (2018). Identity change After conﬂict: Ethnicity, boundaries and belonging in the
  two Irelands. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan/Springer.
Tumasjan, A., Sprenger, T. O., Sandner, P. G., & Welpe, I. M. (2010). Predicting elections
  with Twitter: What 140 characters reveal about political sentiment. Fourth international AAAI conference on weblogs and social media. Retrieved from https://pdfs.
  semanticscholar.org/0ee9/3827fad11535a8bed25b8d00eea35f41770e.pdf
Whyte, J. (1991). Interpreting Northern Ireland. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wilson, R. (2010). The Northern Ireland experience of conﬂict and agreement. A model for
  export? Manchester: Manchester University Press.


24            S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD


Appendix 1. Examples of sentences coded by the sentiment
analysis. Polarity scores indicate negative, neutral, and positive
sentiment.

Theme                                          Sentence                                  Polarity score
Brexit                     However, obviously having the frictionless tariﬀs       Negative: 0.0,
                             and borders for goods etcetera, obviously has a        Neutral: 0.733,
                             beneﬁt as well.                                        Positive: 0.267
Community relations        I mean people are probably more tolerant.               Negative: 0.0,
 in this town                                                                       Neutral: 0.676, Positive:
                                                                                    0.324
Future prospects           It probably will develop, yeah, I don’t think they      Negative: 0.127,
                              have a handle on it at all yeah, I say it will        Neutral: 0.694, Positive:
                              develop worse.                                        0.18
Life in this town in the   It’s a good point that all the troubles, we didn’t      Negative: 0.126, Neutral:
  past                        have rioting here in the streets as such, in our      0.753, Positive: 0.121
                              area.
Life in this town at       It’s a nice town with lots of countryside around it     Negative: 0.0,
  present                     and I’m born and bred here.                           Neutral: 0.833, Positive:
                                                                                    0.167
Personal past              No nothing at all, no I’m very lucky that way, no       Negative: 0.216, Neutral:
                             relatives involved in the troubles, etcetera.          0.499, Positive: 0.285
Personal present           When it come to our children going to school, we        Negative: 0.0,
                             decided that we would send them both to an             Neutral: 0.932, Positive:
                             integrated school because the way I see it is, the     0.068
                             only way to improve this country is for them all
                             to be educated.
Politicians                But the problem is, in this country, if you look at     Negative: 0.081,
                             the percentage of people that vote extreme             Neutral: 0.821, Positive:
                             right hand, as in DUP, and then you look at the        0.098
                             people that vote extreme the other side, Sinn
                             Féin.
Self-other                 Oh God, yeah, I would say in my line of business        Negative: 0.0,
                             Catholics, I would nearly do more business with        Neutral: 0.837, Positive:
                             Catholics than I do with my own side.                  0.163
Community relations        I do understand that thing of people’s businesses       Negative: 0.0,
 in other towns              being their babies as I talk about and I mean, the     Neutral: 1.0,
                             ﬁrst guy I went out to visit in the Armagh area        Positive: 0.0
                             he went in to just myself.
Irish unity                That is something I would be voting for, a United       Negative: 0.0,
                             Ireland.                                               Neutral: 0.741, Positive:
                                                                                    0.259
Life in other towns in     I said, ‘If you’re asking me if I would rather have     Negative: 0.0,
  the past                    been brought up in Ballymun in Dublin or where        Neutral: 1.0,
                              I was brought up at, give me where I was              Positive: 0.0
                              brought up at any day.
Life in other towns at     If I was in the BBC I would be saying to some of        Negative: 0.0,
  present                     our researchers, right, work out the diﬀerence        Neutral:1.0,
                              between Northern Ireland and England.                 Positive: 0.0
Unionism                   Another one I did ﬁnd quite funny is seemingly          Negative: 0.0,
                              there is a vast increase in the number of unionist    Neutral: 0.737, Positive:
                              people getting an Irish passport.                     0.263


Appendix 2. Identiﬁcation of themes expressed in interviews23


        Theme label                               Sub-theme description                                                                 Example
1   Community relations   Instances that describe the interactions between diﬀerent communities in   ‘Yeah. But I think we’re soft because it’s about education but we’re
     in this town           the Xtown region – whether coming together or maintaining distance.        pandering to the needs of both. You know. You’re a Protestant, okay, we’ll
                                                                                                       give you football, or you’re Catholic, we’ll give you Gaelic, oh we need to
                                                                                                       give you rugby. But that’s maybe society. We’re too soft now. We’re
                                                                                                       always giving … it worked in the past.’ (JM2SWP05)
                                                                                                       ‘ … the way I looked at it was I’ll not put up a ﬂag if it’s going to annoy my
                                                                                                       neighbour. My neighbour’s more important than what a ﬂag is. And a ﬂag,
                                                                                                       instead of it up on a pole till it’s in tatters, you should have more respect
                                                                                                       for a ﬂag and if you put it up you should be taking it down maybe at dusk.’
                                                                                                       (JM1FWC11)
2   Community relations   Instances that describe the interactions between diﬀerent communities in   ‘They’re a minority, realistically they talk about Catholics being a minority in
     in other towns         other regions – whether coming together or maintaining distance.           the North, but the Protestants were a minority in the South, so they have
                                                                                                       to have a story how they adapted. Did life dramatically change for them,
                                                                                                       because, like, realistically the South was a very … the church drove the
                                                                                                       country for years and years. It was restraint, investment and everything
                                                                                                       because of the religious beliefs. So, you wonder how they adapted and
                                                                                                       … ’ (JM2SWP05)
                                                                                                       ‘It works. They haven’t made friends … well they will mix, and they know


                                                                                                                                                                                        IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES
                                                                                                       the people and they’re friendly enough that way. They don’t keep in
                                                                                                       touch outside of school but what I’m ﬁnding now is the wee girl goes to
                                                                                                       hockey and she’s seeing a wee girl from the other school and they’re
                                                                                                       talking and it’s outside of school and it’s … so, no, it’s good. I genuinely
                                                                                                       think that’s the way to go. So, the two schools, get them together,
                                                                                                       because they won’t get an integrated status because there’s already an
                                                                                                       integrated in the town. But I think that’s the way to go.’ (JM2PWP12)
3   Self-other            Implicit or explicit distinctions made on the basis of group membership    ‘But going back to Paul comes visiting here, like, and I’m very aware of
                            between self or own group and ‘others’ in relation to characteristics,     where I’m at. Paul’s going you change … he says I’ve been listening to
                            treatment, values, or behaviours.                                          you. Certain shops we go into, you change your language. I says what do

                                                                                                                                                                        (Continued )
Continued.
        Theme label                            Sub-theme description                                                                  Example
                                                                                                      you mean? He says well I’ve known some of the shops, your language or
                                                                                                      use of words slightly diﬀerent. I don’t know I’m doing it. ‘ (JM2SWP05)


                                                                                                                                                                                      S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD
                                                                                                      ‘No, you wouldn’t know, no God no, no you would never, no deﬁnitely you
                                                                                                      wouldn’t, there’s no way of telling. Well if somebody’s name is Cathal or
                                                                                                      Cahir, if it’s very traditional Irish name well then you’ll know they’re
                                                                                                      deﬁnitely one side. But no, unless a name gives it away but you wouldn’t
                                                                                                      be looking for it anyway, it wouldn’t really matter in that sense, no.’
                                                                                                      (SM2PWP01)
4   Brexit            Reference to the issue of Brexit including reﬂections on the referendum,     ‘What do I make of Brexit? I voted to stay. Maybe it’s because the devil you
                        own position and reactions to the issue, current debates, perceived           know is better than the devil you don’t know but the problem with the
                        knock-on eﬀects, and challenges.                                              ﬁrst vote was people maybe thought oh, we’re going to get our hospitals
                                                                                                      sorted out with this 350 million and that really, you know … ’ (JM1FWC11)
                                                                                                      ‘Oh I would deﬁnitely be voting to stay, deﬁnitely. Because I think it’s
                                                                                                      madness. I have a feeling that most other people I think it would be a
                                                                                                      deﬁnite stay, remain now. But that could cause riots in England. It’s
                                                                                                      England, right, ﬁne, but I honestly, people were lied to. I think that to me
                                                                                                      that whole Brexit referendum should be null and void for the simple
                                                                                                      reason people were just lied to, they hadn’t a clue what they were voting
                                                                                                      for.’ (JF2SWC06)
5   Irish unity       Views on the likelihood of Irish unity in the wake of Brexit and what this   ‘It’s more the economic thing, yeah. That would be the big thing to me.
                        change would mean.                                                            Everybody would be … I think we would be a hell of a lot worse oﬀ.’
                                                                                                      (JM2PWP12)
                                                                                                      ‘And then I think the big fear is now that they have, because they’re trying
                                                                                                      to get no deal and want to leave with no deal, that they’ll end up with a
                                                                                                      united Ireland,’ (JF2SWC06)
6   Unionism          Views on unionism in the wake of Brexit, and whether it is faced with        ‘I think it will harm the UK, it’ll harm the Union.’ (SM1BWC03)
                        challenges.                                                                   ‘So, I think at times the unionist argument is quite weak and I do think
                                                                                                      there is a severe ignorance in England as to the true nature of here.’
                                                                                                      (JM2SWC13)
7   Politicians                                                                                    ‘And I wouldn’t necessarily agree with everything the DUP say because I
                                                                                                      think they’re a bit, they think they speak too much for the people as in like

                                                                                                                                                                      (Continued )


Continued.
         Theme label                                   Sub-theme description                                                                   Example
                             Opinions and views on politicians, including political ﬁgures from               abortion, gay rights, all this stuﬀ. I’d be very much for all of that’
                              Northern Ireland, the UK, Republic of Ireland, and further abroad – both        (JM2PWP12)
                              past and present.                                                               ‘They’ve all gone to bed. And they’re sleeping. For 18, 20 months, how
                                                                                                              long it is? They are a disgrace. They are an absolute disgrace. We used to
                                                                                                              have very good politicians but like everybody else including moi, they’ve
                                                                                                              grown old and died some of them.’ (SF1WWC04)
8    Personal life present   Description of participant’s personal life in the present.                    ‘Sometimes I think it would be lovely to move but I would never … it’s not
                                                                                                              … I wouldn’t leave here because I’ve so many friends here and in fact I
                                                                                                              realised how many I had two years ago and how good they were. So, I
                                                                                                              have, you know, I have a good enough life in that respect, I have a job that
                                                                                                              I love. I’ve … I know loads of people so to uproot now at this stage in my
                                                                                                              life maybe, you know, well I wouldn’t want to go away. My daughter’s
                                                                                                              here, she’s in the town, she’s no children or anything but if she had, you’d
                                                                                                              want to be around there.’ (JF2SWC06)
                                                                                                              ‘I’m sounding now like I don’t like this place, it’s awful. No I do love living
                                                                                                              here, but I do really enjoy it here, I do like living here.’ (SF3PWC02)
9    Personal life past      Description of personal life events that the participant experienced in the   ‘I absolutely enjoyed it. As I say, I’m from real staunch loyalist villages such,
                              past.                                                                           and everything was regimental, you know, you go to church, you go to
                                                                                                              school, everybody. You’re in, like as a kid I was in a marching band, done
                                                                                                              the same as the rest of them, but it was … not saying brainwashed but it
                                                                                                              just was the norm. You’re a small country village, this is your tradition, this


                                                                                                                                                                                                IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES
                                                                                                              is what you follow.‘ (JM2SWP05)
                                                                                                              ‘But not, hadn’t really … back then I hadn’t really talked a whole lot about
                                                                                                              politics. In more recent years we have, yeah, but not back then. I suppose
                                                                                                              when things start aﬀecting you or you see things aﬀecting you, and then
                                                                                                              you talk about it more and so, yeah.’ (JM2PWP12)
10   Life in this town       Reference to daily life in the Xtown region in the present.                   ‘Times you’d wonder are the picking, some of the young ones are nearly
       present                                                                                                bitter too, you know. And it’s really sad to see it. I thought with the mixing
                                                                                                              at university and all, that there’d have been more come along and more
                                                                                                              mixing and … ’ (JM1FWC11)
                                                                                                              ‘I could laugh. I sometimes see, you know what children are like, maybe

                                                                                                                                                                                (Continued )
Continued.
         Theme label                                   Sub-theme description                                                                 Example
                                                                                                              they’re ﬁfth year or sixth year and they’ve got a boyfriend and there are


                                                                                                                                                                                            S. DORNSCHNEIDER AND J. TODD
                                                                                                              these two walking up the street, one in the X-school blazer and one in the
                                                                                                              convent blazer. That would never, ever have happened when I was at
                                                                                                              school. Just wouldn’t. But you see it’s very commonplace now. And it’s
                                                                                                              good.’ (SF1WWC04)
11   Life in this town past   Reference to daily life and living conditions in the Xtown region in the     ‘But back then they tended to put people into, they seemed to go into
                                past.                                                                         clumps, so there was our estate was all Protestant. The one right across
                                                                                                              the road was all Catholics. The one in behind it was all Catholics and they
                                                                                                              went in, see everybody went into little areas so back then it was like a
                                                                                                              little Protestant estate.’ (JM2PWP12)
                                                                                                              ‘Yes there was security forces were shot, you know, in the surrounding
                                                                                                              country areas and there would have been IRA bombs, stuﬀ that as far as
                                                                                                              the town itself went you wouldn’t have seen the on-street rioting ever in
                                                                                                              Xtown, like you would see in the old footage from Belfast and from Derry
                                                                                                              and places like that there.’ (SM2PWP01)
12   Life in other towns      Reference to daily life in other towns in the present, either witnessed or   ‘It’s got really expensive now. You used to just, we’d just laugh at the house
       present                  presumed.                                                                     prices, and we’d go up and down … we’d still go up and down, we have a
                                                                                                              client down there and we go up and down in the train, they’d be handing
                                                                                                              out the papers and you’d be looking at the price of the houses in Dublin
                                                                                                              like and it’s my God, who’s ever going to, you know. And the people are
                                                                                                              nice, like.’ (JM2PWP12)
                                                                                                              ‘So … but that was … it was rare that you went out in Belfast, we didn’t
                                                                                                              go out that much. That was probably early ‘80s, 1981, ‘82, maybe. You
                                                                                                              know? But no, nowadays, I wouldn’t think, I would actually feel quite safe
                                                                                                              going out in Belfast, you know. It’s not bad.’ (JF2SWC06)
13   Life in other towns      Reference to daily life and living conditions in other towns in the past.    ‘But you see it did inﬂuence me an awful lot. To go to London and see
       past                                                                                                   integration there, I just couldn’t believe. You know, that there was such
                                                                                                              interaction between Protestants and Catholics. I worked in a bank in
                                                                                                              London and I enjoyed every minute of it.’ (SF1WWC04)
                                                                                                              ‘And well I worked in East Belfast and I seen me even going in and sitting
                                                                                                              in the garage, no point, they’d be getting out in church and out in Harland

                                                                                                                                                                             (Continued )


Continued.
         Theme label                             Sub-theme description                                                                   Example
                                                                                                        and Wolﬀ so I’d not get over the Queen’s Bridge, I might as well sit here
                                                                                                        for half an hour till that rush comes out and like they were going back into
                                                                                                        those places without education because their father was in it and their
                                                                                                        uncle was in it, it was all handed down and it’s the same in Esso and all
                                                                                                        them petroleum companies.’ (JM1FWC11)
14   Future prospects   Description of predictions of what life will be like in Northern Ireland in   ‘But it’s a changing world, and it’ll be interesting where we’re at in the next
                         the near future.                                                               ﬁve, ten years, the fun and games will start if it comes up as a referendum
                                                                                                        for an all-Ireland. It will be fun and games and that could ignite the
                                                                                                        powder bomb again. That’s a fear. Hopefully not in my time. Because I
                                                                                                        think we’ve come a long, long way, you know.’ (JM2SWP05)
                                                                                                        ‘Well, you see, they’re talking about having this hard border. And you see
                                                                                                        that’ll create, it will create unrest. It will create insecurity. And God knows


                                                                                                                                                                                          IRISH POLITICAL STUDIES
                                                                                                        what’ll happen and I don’t like to look at a dark picture, but it won’t be as
                                                                                                        good as it is now. Perhaps if they keep their heads, they could have it, you
                                                                                                        know, all right. But I don’t know.’ (SF1WWC04)