Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 80, Special Issue, 2016, pp. 298–320




FILTER BUBBLES, ECHO CHAMBERS, AND ONLINE
NEWS CONSUMPTION

SETH FLAXMAN*




                                                                                                                              Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
SHARAD GOEL
JUSTIN M. RAO




         Abstract Online publishing, social networks, and web search have
         dramatically lowered the costs of producing, distributing, and discover-
         ing news articles. Some scholars argue that such technological changes
         increase exposure to diverse perspectives, while others worry that they
         increase ideological segregation. We address the issue by examining web-
         browsing histories for 50,000 US-located users who regularly read online
         news. We find that social networks and search engines are associated
         with an increase in the mean ideological distance between individuals.
         However, somewhat counterintuitively, these same channels also are asso-
         ciated with an increase in an individual’s exposure to material from his or
         her less preferred side of the political spectrum. Finally, the vast majority
         of online news consumption is accounted for by individuals simply visit-
         ing the home pages of their favorite, typically mainstream, news outlets,
         tempering the consequences—both positive and negative—of recent tech-
         nological changes. We thus uncover evidence for both sides of the debate,
         while also finding that the magnitude of the effects is relatively modest.


The Internet has dramatically reduced the cost of producing, distributing, and
accessing diverse political information and perspectives. Online publishing,
for example, circumvents much of the costly equipment required to produce
physical newspapers and magazines. With the rise of social media sites such
as Facebook and Twitter, individuals can now readily share their favorite

Seth Flaxman is a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Statistics at the University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK. Sharad Goel is an assistant professor in the Management Science and
Engineering Department at Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Justin M. Rao is a senior
researcher at Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA. The authors thank David Blei, Ceren
Budak, Susan Dumais, Andrew Gelman, Dan Goldstein, Matt Salganik, Tim Wu, and Georgios
Zervas. Research was carried out while S.F. was an intern at Microsoft Research NYC. *Address
correspondence to Seth Flaxman, Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, 24–29 St. Giles’,
Oxford OX1 3LB United Kingdom; e-mail: flaxman@stats.ox.ac.uk.
doi:10.1093/poq/nfw006                                                           Advance Access publication March 22, 2016
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Association for Public Opinion Research.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                               299


stories with hundreds of their contacts (Bakshy et al. 2012; Goel, Watts, and
Goldstein 2012). Moreover, search engines facilitate a diversity of voices by
offering access to a range of opinions far broader than those found in one’s
local paper, greatly expanding the information available to citizens and their




                                                                                    Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
choices over news outlets.
   What is the effect of such technological changes on ideological segrega-
tion? On one hand, with more options, individuals may choose to consume
only content that accords with their previously held beliefs. Commentators
such as Sunstein (2009) have thus predicted the rise of “echo chambers,” in
which individuals are largely exposed to conforming opinions. Indeed, in con-
trolled experiments, subjects tend to choose news articles from outlets aligned
with their political opinions (Garrett 2009; Iyengar and Hahn 2009; Munson
and Resnick 2010). Additionally, search engines, news aggregators, and social
networks are increasingly personalizing content through machine-learning
models (Agichtein, Brill, and Dumais 2006; Das et al. 2007; Hannak et al.
2013), potentially creating “filter bubbles” (Pariser 2011) in which algorithms
inadvertently amplify ideological segregation by automatically recommend-
ing content an individual is likely to agree with. Moreover, individuals are
more likely to share information that conforms to opinions in their local social
neighborhoods (Moscovici and Zavalloni 1969; Myers and Bishop 1970;
Spears, Lea, and Lee 1990; Schkade, Sunstein, and Hastie 2007). If realized,
such information segregation is a serious concern, as it has long been thought
that functioning democracies depend critically on voters who are exposed to
and understand a variety of political views (Downs 1957; Baron 1994; Lassen
2005).
   On the other hand, Benkler (2006) and others have argued that increased
choice and social networks lead to greater exposure to diverse ideas, break-
ing individuals free from insular consumption patterns (Obendorf et al. 2007;
Goel, Hofman, and Sirer 2012). Providing evidence for this view, Messing and
Westwood (2012) show that social endorsements increase exposure to hetero-
geneous perspectives. Relatedly, Goel, Mason, and Watts (2010) show that a
substantial fraction of ties in online social networks are between individuals on
opposite sides of the political spectrum, opening up the possibility for diverse
content discovery. Moreover, in the context of music consumption, Hosanagar
et al. (2013) find that personalized recommendation systems increase within-
user diversity. Taken together, these results suggest that technologies like web
search and social networks reduce ideological segregation.
   In short, there are compelling arguments on both sides of the debate. We
investigate the issue by empirically examining the web-browsing patterns of
50,000 anonymized US-located Internet users who regularly read online news.
Our focus on this group of active news readers stems from reasons both substan-
tive and methodological. Such individuals tend to be more politically active, and
also have the greatest preferences for partisan media (Iyengar and Hahn 2009).
As a result, the effects of technological change on ideological segregation are
300                                                               Flaxman, Goel, and Rao


arguably larger and more consequential for this group. Further, as described in
more detail below, it is exceedingly difficult to infer individual-level estimates
without repeated observations for each individual. We thus limit our analysis—
and accordingly our conclusions— to active online news readers.1




                                                                                                      Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
   For this sample of active news readers, our data set contains their detailed
web-browsing activity organized as a time series by user. We apply machine-
learning algorithms to article text to identify hard news. We then further algo-
rithmically separate out descriptive reporting from opinion pieces, and use
an audience-based approach to estimate an outlet’s conservative share: the
fraction of its readership that supported the Republican candidate in the most
recent presidential election. Following past work, we then define (population-
level) ideological segregation as the expected difference in the conservative
shares of news outlets visited by two randomly selected individuals. We find
that segregation is slightly higher for descriptive news accessed via social
media than for articles read by directly visiting a news outlet’s home page. For
opinion pieces, however, the effect is more substantial.
   The overall level of segregation we observe could be the result of two
qualitatively different individual-level behaviors. A typical individual might
regularly read a variety of liberal and conservative news outlets but still have
a left- or right-leaning preference. Alternatively, individuals may choose to
read only publications that are ideologically similar to one another, rarely
reading opposing perspectives. We find strong evidence for the latter pattern.
Specifically, users who predominately visit left-leaning news outlets only very
rarely read substantive news articles from conservative sites, and vice versa
for right-leaning readers, an effect that is even more pronounced for opin-
ion articles. Interestingly, exposure to opposing perspectives is higher for the
channels associated with the highest segregation, search, and social. Thus,
counterintuitively, we find evidence that recent technological changes both
increase and decrease various aspects of the partisan divide.
   Finally, we note that directly accessed, descriptive reporting comprises 75
percent of traffic, driven primarily by mainstream news outlets. This result
helps explain why segregation in online and offline news consumption has
been found to be comparable (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011), despite theoreti-
cal predictions to the contrary. Namely, even though we do see measurable
effects of recent technological change on ideological segregation, we also
find that most online news consumption is still driven by individuals directly
visiting the websites of mainstream news organizations. Social networks and

1. We note that this group constitutes a small minority of the overall population. In a 2012 Pew
Research survey, only 39 percent of adults claimed to have read online news in the previous day
(http://www.people-press.org/2012/09/27/in-changing-news-landscape-even-television-is- vul-
nerable), while studies recording actual browsing behavior tend to find that this number is quite
a bit lower (Goel, Hofman, and Sirer 2012), and a 2014 Pew Research survey reported that while
Facebook had risen in popularity as a means of disseminating news, it still trailed both television
and radio.
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                                                301


web search, it appears, have not transformed news consumption to the degree
many have hoped or feared. Indeed, we find that only about 1 in 300 out-
bound clicks from Facebook correspond to substantive news, with video- and
photo-sharing sites far-and-away the most popular destinations. Nevertheless,




                                                                                                      Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
we find that for opinion stories—which account for 6 percent of hard-news
consumption—about one-third come through social or search. So, if opinion
content has an outsized importance on citizens’ political views, these channels
may still be substantively important. Moreover, the next generation of Internet
users may increasingly rely on social media to obtain news and opinion, with
corresponding implications for ideological segregation.


Data and Methods
Our primary analysis is based on web-browsing records collected via the
Bing Toolbar, a popular add-on application for the Internet Explorer web
browser. Upon installing the toolbar, users can consent to sharing their data
via an opt-in agreement, and to protect privacy, all records are anonymized
prior to our analysis. Each toolbar installation is assigned a unique identi-
fier, giving the data a panel structure. We start by analyzing the web-brows-
ing behavior of 1.2 million US-located users for the three-month period
between March and May 2013, and eventually focus on 50,000 users who
actively read the news, as described below. For each user, we have a time-
stamped collection of URLs opened in the browser, along with the user’s
geographic location, as inferred via the IP address. In total, our data set
consists of 2.3 billion distinct page views, with a median of 991 page views
per individual.2
   As with nearly all observational studies of individual-level web-browsing
behavior, our study is restricted to individuals who voluntarily share their
data, which likely creates selection issues. These users, for example, are
presumably less likely to be concerned about privacy. Moreover, it is gen-
erally believed that Internet Explorer users are on average older than the
Internet population at large. Nevertheless, we follow previous authors in
treating data from the Bing Toolbar as representative of web-user behavior
more broadly (Teevan, Ramage, and Morris 2011; Athey and Mobius 2012),
while acknowledging the challenge of establishing the representativeness
of this sample. As one measure of representativeness, we compared the top
twenty-five sites in our data set—ordered by the number of unique monthly

2. It is likely that we do not have a complete record of a user’s browsing history, in part because
an individual may use multiple browsers (e.g., at home and at work), not all of which have the
Bing Toolbar installed, and some users browse news on mobile devices, while our sample is
restricted to desktop users. Finally, because some sites are constructed such that a single page
view can correspond to multiple pieces of distinct content, page view estimates may not reflect
the total amount of content an individual sees.
302                                                              Flaxman, Goel, and Rao


Table 1. Most Predictive Words for Classifying Articles as Either News
or Non-News, and Separately, for Separating Out Descriptive News from
Opinion
                  Front-section news & opinion (+) vs. “non-news” (−)




                                                                                                    Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
Positive                                              Negative
contributed, democratic, economy,                     film, today, pretty, probably personal,
authorities, leadership, read, Republican,            learn, technology, mind posted, isn’t
Democrats, country’s, administration
                            Opinion (+) vs. descriptive news (−)
Positive                                              Negative
stay, seem, important, seems isn’t, fact,             contributed, reporting, said, say
actually, reason latest, simply                       spokesman, experts interview,
                                                      expected added, hers



US visitors in February 2013—to lists by Quantcast and Alexa, the two most
prominent publicly available website rankings. The Spearman correlation is
0.67 and 0.7, respectively. As a point of comparison, we note that the Alexa
and Quantcast rankings have a correlation of 0.64.3 We thus conclude that
the aggregate browsing patterns of our sample do appear to be largely in line
with samples used to produce industry-standard website rankings. Note, how-
ever, that some of the shortcomings of our data set (e.g., underrepresentation
of corporate networks) are also shared by commercially available data sets
(Athey and Mobius 2012).

IDENTIFYING NEWS AND OPINION ARTICLES

We select an initial universe of news outlets (i.e., web domains) via the Open
Directory Project (ODP, dmoz.org), a collective of tens of thousands of edi-
tors who hand-label websites into a classification hierarchy. This gives 7,923
distinct domains labeled as news, politics/news, politics/media, and regional/
news. Since the vast majority of these news sites receive relatively little traffic,
to simplify our analysis we restrict ourselves to the 100 domains that attracted
the largest number of unique visitors from our sample of toolbar users.4 This
list of popular news sites includes every major national news source, well-
known blogs, and many regional dailies, and collectively accounts for over
3. To compute this correlation, we calculated the Spearman correlation of our users’ ranking of
Quantcast’s top twenty-five sites to Quantcast’s ranking, and similarly for comparing to Alexa.
For comparing Quantcast to Alexa, we used Quantcast’s ranking of Alexa’s top twenty-five sites.
In each case, rankings were based on monthly unique visitors.
4. This list has high overlap with the current Alexa rankings of news outlets (http://www. alexa.
com/topsites/category/Top/News).
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                                               303


98 percent of page views of news sites in the full ODP list (as estimated via
our toolbar sample). The complete list of 100 domains is given in the online
appendix. The bulk of the 4.1 million articles we consider do not fall into cate-
gories where political leaning has a meaningful interpretation, but rather relate




                                                                                                     Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
to sports, weather, lifestyle, entertainment, and other largely apolitical topics.
   We filter out these apolitical stories by training a binary classifier on the
article text. The classifier identified 1.9 million stories (46 percent) as “front-
section” news. Next, starting from this set of 1.9 million front-section news
stories, we separate out descriptive news from opinion via a second classifier;
200,000 (11 percent) are ultimately found to be opinion stories. Table 1 lists
words with the highest positive and negative weights for both classifers—the
words accord with common intuition. Details of the article classification,
including performance benchmarks, are in the online appendix.
MEASURING THE POLITICAL SLANT OF PUBLISHERS

In the absence of human ratings, there are no existing methods to reliably
assess article slant with both high recall and precision.5 Since our sample has
over 1.9 million articles classified as either front-section news or opinion,
human labeling is not feasible. We thus follow the literature (Groseclose and
Milyo 2005; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010, 2011) and focus on the slant at
the outlet level, ultimately assigning articles the polarity score of the outlet
in which they were published. By doing so, we clearly lose some signal. For
instance, we mislabel liberal op-eds on generally conservative news sites, and
we mark neutral reporting of a breaking event as having the overall slant of
the outlet. Nevertheless, such a compromise is common practice, and where
possible, we attempt to mitigate any resulting biases.
   Unfortunately, estimates from past work (Groseclose and Milyo 2005;
Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010) cover less than half of the 100 outlets used in
our main analysis. Our solution is to construct an audience-based measure of
outlet slant (Tewksbury 2005; Lawrence, Sides, and Farrell 2010; Gentzkow
and Shapiro 2011). Specifically, we estimate the fraction of each news outlet’s
readership that voted for the Republican candidate in the most recent presiden-
tial election, which we call the outlet’s conservative share. Thus, left-leaning, or
“liberal,” outlets have conservative shares less than about 50 percent, and right-
leaning, or “conservative,” outlets have conservative shares greater than about
50 percent. To estimate the political composition of a news outlet’s readership,
we use the location of each webpage view as inferred from the IP address. We
can then measure how the popularity of a news outlet varies across counties
as a function of the counties’ political compositions, which in turn yields the
estimates we desire. We detail our approach in the online appendix.
5. High precision is possible by focusing on the use of highly polarizing phrases such as “death
panel,” but the recall of this method tends to be very low, meaning most pieces of content are not
rated. Even with human ratings, the wide variety of sites we investigate—ranging from relatively
small blogs to national newspapers—exhibit correspondingly diverse norms of language usage,
making any content-level assessment of political slant quite difficult.
304                                                              Flaxman, Goel, and Rao


   Table 2 lists estimated conservative shares for the twenty news outlets attract-
ing the most number of unique visitors in our data set, ranging from the BBC
and the New York Times on the left, to Fox News and Newsmax on the right.
While our measure of conservative share is admittedly imperfect, the list does




                                                                                                    Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
seem largely consistent with commonly held beliefs on the slant of particular
outlets.6 Furthermore, as shown in figure 1, our ranking of news sites is highly
correlated with the survey-based measure of audience ideology derived from a
Pew (2014) study.7 Among the seventeen news sources on both lists, the cor-
relation was 0.81. We similarly find a correlation of 0.82 among the top twenty
domains in the Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) list based on 2008 audience data,
and 0.77 correlation among the top twenty domains in the Bakshy, Messing,
and Adamic (2015) list based on Facebook data. In the online appendix, we
give the conservative shares for our full list of 100 domains.

INFERRING CONSUMPTION CHANNELS

We define four channels through which an individual can discover a news
story: direct, aggregator, social, and search. Direct discovery means a user


Table 2. For the Twenty Most Popular News Outlets, Each Outlet’s
Estimated Conservative Share (i.e., the two-party fraction of its
readership that voted for the Republican candidate in the last
presidential election)
Publication                       Cons. share       Publication                    Cons. share
BBC                                   0.30          LA Times                           0.46
New York Times                        0.31          Yahoo News                         0.47
Huffington Post                       0.35          USA Today                          0.47
Washington Post                       0.37          Daily Mail                         0.47
Wall Street Journal                   0.39          CNBC                               0.47
US News & World Report                0.39          Christian Sci. Monitor             0.47
TIME Magazine                         0.40          ABC News                           0.48
Reuters                               0.41          NBC News                           0.50
CNN                                   0.42          Fox News                           0.59
CBS News                              0.45          Newsmax                            0.61



6. One exception is the Wall Street Journal, which we characterize as left-leaning even though
it is generally thought to be politically conservative. We note, however, that the most common
audience and content-based measures of slant also characterize the paper as relatively liberal
(Groseclose and Milyo 2005; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011). As a robustness check, we repeated
our analysis after omitting the Wall Street Journal from our data set, and found that none of our
substantive results changed.
7. Pew Research Center, October 2014, “Political Polarization and Media Habits.” The report is
accessible at http://www.journalism.org/interactives/media-polarization/.
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                            305




                                                                                 Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
Figure 1. Comparison of Our Measure to a Pew Survey-Based Measure.
A comparison of our estimate of conservative share of an outlet’s audience to
a Pew survey-based measure of audience ideology, where point sizes are pro-
portional to popularity. For the seventeen outlets for which both measures are
available, the correlation between the two scores is 0.81.


directly and independently visits a top-level news domain such as nytimes.
com (e.g., by typing the URL into the browser’s address bar, accessing it
through a bookmark, or performing a “navigational search,” explained below),
and then proceeds to read articles within that outlet. The aggregator channel
refers to referrals from Google News —one of the last remaining popular
news aggregators—which presents users with links to stories hosted on other
news sites. We define the social channel to include referrals from Facebook,
Twitter, and various web-based e-mail services. Finally, the search category
refers to news stories accessed as the result of web-search queries on Google,
Bing, and Yahoo. The time series of webpage views for an individual is not
sufficient to perfectly determine the discovery channel of a news article. We
306                                                     Flaxman, Goel, and Rao


get around this problem with a “short” versus “long” URL distinction in the
following simple heuristic: define the “referrer” of a news article to be the
most recently viewed URL that is a top-level domain, such as nytimes.com
or facebook.com (short URL), but not a specific story link, such as nytimes.




                                                                                       Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
com/a-news-story (long URL). We then use the referrer to classify the discov-
ery channel. For example, if the referrer is a news domain, such as foxnews.
com, then the channel is “direct navigation,” whereas the channel is “social”
if the referrer is, for instance, facebook.com. The intuition behind this method
is that a user is very unlikely to directly type in a specific long URL, so the
visit must have a referrer, which can be inferred from the time series of URLs.
The heuristic thus is based on two key assumptions: first, users do not typi-
cally type in the long, unwieldy web addresses assigned to individual articles,
but rather are directed there via a previous visit to a top-level domain and a
subsequent chain of clicks; and second, top-level domains are not typically
shared or posted via e-mail, social media, or aggregators. Even when refer-
ring pages can be perfectly inferred, there can still be genuine ambiguity in
how to determine the consumption channel. For example, if an individual fol-
lows a Facebook link to a New York Times article and then proceeds to read
three additional articles at that outlet, are all four articles “social” or just the
first? Our solution is to take the middle ground: in this example, any subse-
quent article-to-article views (e.g., clicks on a “related story”) are classified
as “social,” whereas an intermediate visit to the outlet’s front page results in
subsequent views being classified as “direct.” Note that this is consistent with
the simple procedure described above, since the site’s front page results in a
short URL.


LIMITING TO ACTIVE NEWS CONSUMERS

As discussed above, for theoretical and methodological reasons we limit our
analysis to individuals who regularly read online news. Specifically, our pri-
mary analysis is based on the subset of users who have read at least ten sub-
stantive news articles and at least two opinion pieces in the three-month time
frame we consider. This first requirement reduces our initial sample of 1.2 mil-
lion individuals to 173,450 (14 percent of the total); the second requirement
further reduces the sample to 50,383 (4 percent of the total). These numbers
are generally lower than past estimates, likely because of our focus on substan-
tive news and opinion (which excludes sports, entertainment, and other soft
news), and our explicit activity measures (as opposed to self-reports).
   It is perhaps surprising that such a small fraction of the population regu-
larly reads online news, particularly opinion articles. While many individu-
als presumably learn about current events through alternative sources, such
as television, radio, or word of mouth, it is likely that many others are sim-
ply not politically engaged. Whatever the ultimate cause, the fact that such
a small fraction of the population regularly reads online news arguably has
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                                                    307


considerable impact on both political discourse and media production, though
we by and large leave further discussion of these topics to future work.
   Finally, we note that though we focus here on this small group of active
news consumers, many of our qualitative conclusions remain intact if we




                                                                                                           Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
instead carry out our analysis on the larger set of users who read at least one
substantive news article. For example, among this broader set of individuals,
social media and web search are still associated with higher segregation than
direct browsing. However, as expected (Iyengar and Hahn 2009), the overall
levels of segregation are lower for the broader group than for those who read
online news more regularly (see figure A4 in the online appendix).

Results

OVERALL SEGREGATION

Recall that the conservative share of a news outlet—which we also refer to
as the outlet’s polarity —is the estimated fraction of the publication’s reader-
ship that voted for the Republican candidate in the most recent presidential
election. We now define the polarity of an individual to be the typical polarity
of the news outlet that he or she visits. We then define segregation to be the
expected distance between the polarity scores of two randomly selected users.
This definition of segregation, which is in line with past work (Dandekar,
Goel, and Lee 2013), intuitively captures the idea that segregated populations
are those in which pairs of individuals are, on average, far apart.
   Due to sparsity in the data, however, our measure of segregation is not
entirely straightforward to estimate. In particular, under a naive inference
strategy, noisy estimates of user polarities would inflate the estimate of seg-
regation. We thus estimate segregation via a hierarchical Bayesian model
(Gelman and Hill 2007), as described in more detail below. Finally, we note
that throughout our analysis we consider the segregation associated with vari-
ous subsets of consumption (e.g., views of opinion stories on social media
sites). Intuitively, such measures correspond to first restricting to the rel-
evant subset of consumption and then computing the segregation effects;
in practice, though, we simultaneously estimate the numbers in a single,
random-effects model.
   We define the polarity score of an article to be the polarity score of the news
outlet in which it was published.8 Now, let Xij be the polarity score of the jth
article read by user i. We model

                                         Xij ∼ N ( µi , σ 2d ),                                     (1)

8. While this is standard practice, it ignores, for example, the possibility of a conservative outlet
publishing liberal editorials. Ideally, the classification would be done at the article level, but there
are no known methods for reliably doing so.
308                                                       Flaxman, Goel, and Rao


where µi is the latent polarity score for user i, and σd is a global dispersion
parameter (to be estimated from the data). To mitigate data sparsity, we further
assume the latent variables µi are themselves drawn from a normal distribu-
tion. That is,




                                                                                           Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
                                  µi ∼ N( µ p , σ p2 ).                             (2)

   To complete the model specification, we assign weak priors to the hyperpa-
rameters σd, µp, and σp. Ideally, we would perform a fully Bayesian analysis
to obtain the posterior distribution of the parameters. However, for computa-
tional convenience, we use the approximate marginal maximum likelihood
estimates obtained from the lmer() function in the R package lme4 (Bates,
Maechler, and Bolker 2013).
   Though the distributional assumptions we make are standard in the literature
(Gelman and Hill 2007), our modeling choices of course affect the estimates
we obtain. As a robustness check, we note that a naive, model-free estimation
procedure yields qualitatively similar, though ostensibly less precise, results.
Moreover, in our analysis of Twitter in the online appendix in section A.1—a
setting where sparsity is not an issue— we estimate user polarity scores
directly and find that they are indeed approximately normally distributed.
   Having specified the model, we can now formally define segregation, which
we do in terms of the expected squared distance between individuals’ polar-
ity scores. Namely, we define segregation to be           E ( µi − µ j )2 . After simple
algebraic manipulation, our measure of segregation further reduces to 2σ p .
Higher values of this measure correspond to higher levels of segregation, with
individuals more spread out across the ideological spectrum.
   Figure 2 shows the distribution of polarity scores (i.e., the distribution of µi )
for users in our sample. We find that most individuals are relatively centrist,
with two-thirds of people having polarity scores between 0.41 and 0.54. Overall
segregation is estimated to be 0.11, which means that for two randomly selected
users, the ideological distance between the publications they typically read is
on par with that between the centrist NBC News and the left-leaning Daily Kos
(or, equivalently, ABC News and Fox News). Thus, though we certainly find a
degree of ideological segregation, it would seem to be relatively moderate.

SEGREGATION BY CHANNEL AND ARTICLE SUBJECTIVITY

When measuring segregation across various distribution channels and levels
of article subjectivity, the data sparsity issues we encountered above are exac-
erbated. For example, even among active news consumers, relatively few indi-
viduals regularly read news articles from both aggregators and social media
sites. And when we further segment articles into opinion and descriptive news,
it compounds the problem. However, the polarity of consumption for a user
across channels should be correlated; for example, the opinion pieces one
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                                    309




                                                                                          Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
Figure 2. Distribution of Individual-Level Polarity. Each individual’s
polarity score is the (model-estimated) average conservative share of the news
outlets he or she visits.

reads from Facebook are likely ideologically related to the articles one reads
from Google News. There is thus an opportunity to improve our estimates by
“sharing strength” across channels and subjectivity levels, and accordingly to
jointly estimate the segregation parameters of interest. Moreover, joint estima-
tion with weak priors also mitigates channel-selection issues.
   The four consumption channels (aggregator, direct, web search, and social
media) and two subjectivity classes (descriptive reporting and opinion) give eight
subjectivity-by-channel dimensions. Let Xijk denote the polarity of the jth article
that user i reads in the kth subjectivity-by-channel category, where we recall that
the polarity of an article is defined to be the conservative share of the site on which
it was published. Generalizing our hierarchical Bayesian framework, we model

                                  X ijk ∼ N ( µik , σ d2 )                         (3)


     µi is the k-th component in the latent eight-dimensional polarity vec-
where   k

tor µi for user i, and σd is a global dispersion parameter. As before, we deal
                                                                           
with sparsity by further assuming a distribution on the latent variables µi
310                                                                Flaxman, Goel, and Rao


themselves. In this case, we model each individual’s polarity vector as being
drawn from a multivariate normal:
                                     
                              µi ∼ N ( µ p , Σ p ),                       (4)




                                                                                                       Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
         
where µp and Σp are global hyperparameters. The full Bayesian model
is analyzed by assigning weak priors to the hyperparameters and computing
posterior distributions of the latent variables, but in practice we simply fit the
model with marginal maximum likelihood.
   As with the analysis in the Overall Segregation section, the diagonal entries
of the covariance matrix Σp yield estimates of segregation for each of the eight
subjectivity-by-channel categories. In particular, letting σ k denote the k-th
                                                                2


diagonal entry of Σp, segregation in the k-th category is 2σ k. Table 3 lists
these diagonal parameter estimates.9 The off-diagonal entries of Σp measure
the relationship between categories of one’s ideological exposure. For exam-
ple, after normalizing Σp to generate the corresponding correlation matrix, we
find that the correlation between social media-driven descriptive news and
opinion is 0.71. The full correlation matrix is included in the online appendix.
   To help visualize these model estimates, figure 3 plots segregation across the
four consumption channels, for both opinion and descriptive news. The size
of the markers is proportional to total consumption within the corresponding
channel, normalized separately for opinion and descriptive news. To ground
the scale of the y-axis, we note that among the top twenty most popular news
outlets, conservative share ranges from 0.30 for the liberal BBC to 0.61 for the
conservative Newsmax.
   Figure 3 indicates that social media is indeed associated with higher seg-
regation than direct browsing. For descriptive news this effect is subtle, with
segregation increasing from 0.11 for direct browsing to 0.12 for articles linked


Table 3. Bayesian Model Estimates of Ideological Consumption by
Channel and Subjectivity type (the column µp indicates the corresponding
entry of µp, and the column σp indicates the corresponding diagonal entry
of the model-estimated covariance matrix Σp)
                                       Front-section news                          Opinion
Consumption channel                    µp                 σp                µp                 σp
Aggregator                            0.44              0.051              0.44              0.092
Direct                                0.47              0.076              0.47              0.094
Social                                0.46              0.087              0.47              0.12
Search                                0.46              0.087              0.46              0.14


9. Given the large sample size, all estimates are statistically significant well beyond conventional
levels.
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                                311




                                                                                     Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
Figure 3. Estimates of Ideological Segregation across Consumption
Channels. Point sizes indicate traffic fraction, normalized separately within
the news and opinion lines.

from social media. However, for opinion pieces, the effect is more pronounced,
rising from 0.13 to 0.17. It is unclear whether this increased segregation is the
effect of algorithmic filtering of the news stories appearing in one’s social feed
(Pariser 2011), the result of ideological similarity among one’s social contacts
(McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001; Goel, Mason, and Watts 2010),
due to active selection by individuals of which stories in their feed to read
(Garrett 2009; Iyengar and Hahn 2009; Munson and Resnick 2010; Bakshy,
Messing, and Adamic 2015), or some combination of all three. In any case,
however, our results are directionally consistent with worries that social media
increases segregation.
   We further find that search engines are associated with the highest levels of
segregation among the four channels we investigate: 0.12 for descriptive news
and 0.20 for opinion. To put these numbers in perspective, a difference of 0.20
corresponds to the ideological distance between the centrist Yahoo News and
the left-leaning Huffington Post (or, equivalently, CNN and the right-leaning
National Review). Some authors have argued that web-search personalization
is a key driver of such effects (Pariser 2011). There are two alternative expla-
nations. The first is that users implicitly influence the ideological leanings of
search results through their query formulation by, for example, issuing a query
312                                                     Flaxman, Goel, and Rao


Table 4. Consumption Volume by Content Type and Channel
                                             Fraction of           Fraction of total
Content type            Channel             content type            consumption




                                                                                       Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
News                     Direct                 0.79                    0.76
News                    Search                  0.14                    0.13
News                     Social                 0.06                    0.06
News                   Aggregator               0.004                   0.004
Opinion                  Direct                 0.67                    0.03
Opinion                 Search                  0.23                    0.01
Opinion                  Social                 0.10                    0.004
Opinion                Aggregator               0.004                   0.0002


such as “obamacare” instead of “health care reform” (Borra and Weber 2012).
The second is that even when presented with the same search results, users are
more likely to select outlets that share their own political ideology, especially
for opinion content, which has been found in laboratory studies (Garrett 2009;
Iyengar and Hahn 2009; Munson and Resnick 2010). While we cannot deter-
mine the relative importance of these factors, our findings do suggest that the
relatively recent ability to instantly query large corpora of news articles—vastly
expanding users’ choice sets—contributes to increased ideological segregation,
at least marginally for descriptive news and substantially for opinion stories.
   At the other end of the spectrum, aggregators exhibit the lowest segregation.
In particular, even though aggregators return personalized news results from a
broad set of publications with disparate ideological leanings (Das et al. 2007),
the overall effect is relatively low segregation. Even for aggregators, though,
segregation for opinion (0.13) is far higher than for descriptive news (0.07).
   Given that our results are directionally consistent with filter bubble concerns,
how is it that in the Overall Segregation section we found largely moderate over-
all levels of segregation? The answer, as shown in Table 4, is simply that only a
relatively small fraction of consumption is of opinion pieces or from polarizing
channels (social and search). Indeed, even after removing apolitical categories
like sports and entertainment (which account for a substantial fraction of traffic),
opinion still constitutes only 6 percent of consumption. Further, for both descrip-
tive news and opinion, direct browsing is the dominant consumption channel (79
and 67 percent, respectively), dwarfing social media and search engines.
   To help explain these results, we note that while sharing information is
popular on social media, the dissemination of news is not its primary func-
tion. In fact, we find that only 1 in 300 clicks of links posted on Facebook
lead to substantive news articles; rather, the vast majority of these clicks go
to video- and photo-sharing sites. Moreover, we observe that even the most
extreme segregation that we see (0.20 for opinion articles returned by search
engines) is not, in our view, astronomically high. In particular, that level of
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                                                  313


segregation corresponds to the ideological distance between Fox News and
Daily Kos, which represents meaningful differences in coverage (Baum and
Groeling 2008) but is within the mainstream political spectrum. Consequently,
though the predicted filter bubble and echo chamber mechanisms do appear




                                                                                                        Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
to increase online segregation, their overall effects at this time are somewhat
limited.


IDEOLOGICAL ISOLATION

We have thus far examined segregation in terms of the distance between individ-
uals’ mean ideological positions. It could be the case, for example, that individu-
als typically consume content from a variety of ideological viewpoints, though
ultimately skewing toward the left or right, leading to moderate overall seg-
regation. Alternatively, individuals might be tightly concentrated around their
ideological centers, only rarely reading content from across the political spec-
trum. These two potential patterns have markedly different implications for the
broader issues of political discussion and consensus formation (Benkler 2006).
   To investigate this question of within-user variation, we start by looking at
the dispersion parameter σd in the overall consumption model described by
equations (1) and (2). We find that σd = 0.06, indicating that individuals typi-
cally read publications that are tightly concentrated ideologically. This finding
of within-user ideological concentration is driven in part by the fact that indi-
viduals often simply turn to a single news source for information: 78 percent of
users get the majority of their news from a single publication, and 94 percent
get a majority from at most two sources. As shown in the online appendix,
however, this concentration effect holds even for those who visit multiple news
outlets. Thus, even when individuals visit a variety of news outlets, they are, by
and large, frequenting publications with similar ideological perspectives.
   We now investigate ideological isolation across consumption channels and
subjectivity categories. For each of the eight subjectivity-by-channel catego-
ries and for each user, we first estimate the variance of the polarities of articles
read by a user in that category.10 For each category, we then average these
individual-level estimates of variance (and take the square root of the result) to
attain category-level estimates. Figure 4a plots these estimates of within-user
variation by channel and subjectivity.
   Across all four consumption channels, figure 4a shows that descriptive and
opinion articles are associated with similar levels of within-user variation.
Social media, however, is associated with higher variation than direct brows-
ing. Though this may at first seem surprising given that social media also
has relatively high segregation, the explanation is clear in retrospect: when
browsing directly, individuals typically visit only a handful of news sources,
whereas social media sites expose users to more variety. Likewise, web-search

10. For each category, we restrict our data to users who read at least two articles in that category.
                         Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
Flaxman, Goel, and Rao




                                                                                                                                                    Figure 4. Within-User Variation across Consumption Channel (a) and by
                                                                                                                                                    Mean Polarity (b).
314
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                                                 315


engines, while associated with high segregation, have relatively high diversity.
Finally, relatively high levels of within-user spread are observed for aggrega-
tors, as one might have expected.
   We similarly examine within-user ideological variation as a function of user




                                                                                                       Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
polarity (i.e., mean ideological preference). In this case, we first bin individu-
als by their polarity—as estimated in the Overall Segregation section—and
then compute the individual-level variation of article polarity, averaged over
users in each group. As shown in figure 4b, within-user variation is small and
quite similar for users with polarity ranging from 0.3 to 0.6. Interestingly, the
2 percent of individuals with polarity of approximately 0.7 or more (signifi-
cantly to the right of Fox News) exhibit a strikingly high within-user variation
of 0.17. This preceding result prompts a question: Does the high within-user
variation we see among extreme right-leaning readers result from them reading
articles from across the political divide, or are they simply reading a variety of
right-leaning publications? More generally, across channels and subjectivity
types, what is the relationship between within-user variation and exposure to
ideologically divergent news stories? We conclude our analysis of ideological
isolation by examining these questions.
   We start by defining a news outlet as left-leaning (right-leaning) if it is in
the bottom (top) third of the 100 outlets we consider; the full ranked list of
publications is given in the online appendix. The left-leaning publications
include newspapers from liberal areas, such as the San Francisco Chronicle
and the New York Times, as well as blogs such as the Huffington Post and
Daily Kos; the right-leaning set includes newspapers from historically con-
servative areas, such as the Fort Worth Star-Telegram and the Salt Lake
Tribune, and online outlets such as Newsmax and Breitbart; and centrist
publications (i.e., the middle third) include, for example, Yahoo News and
USA Today. We refer to the combined collection of left- and right-leaning
outlets as partisan.
   For each user who reads at least two partisan articles, define his or her lib-
eral exposure li to be the fraction of partisan articles read that are left-leaning.
We define an individual’s opposing partisan exposure as oi = min(li ,1 − li ) .
Thus, for individuals who predominantly read left-leaning articles, oi is the
proportion of partisan articles they read that are right-leaning, and vice versa.
We note that oi is defined for only the 82 percent of individuals in our sample
that have read at least two partisan articles.
   Figure 5 shows average opposing partisan exposure, partitioned by arti-
cle channel and subjectivity (figure 5a), and by user polarity (figure 5b).11
For every subset we consider, only a small minority of articles—less than

11. To compute the estimates of average opposing partisan exposure shown in figure 5a, o is
                                                                                                i
computed separately for each of the eight subjectivity-by-channel categories by restricting our
data to the relevant articles, and limiting them to users who read at least two partisan articles in
that category.
316                                                   Flaxman, Goel, and Rao




                                                                                    Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026




Figure 5. Opposing Partisan Exposure by Channel (a) and Polarity (b).
Descriptive news (solid line) and opinion (dotted line). Point sizes indicate the
relative fraction of traffic attributed to each source, normalized separately by
article category.
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                                317


20 percent in all cases, and less than 5 percent for all non-centrist users—
comes from the opposite side of an individual’s preferred partisan perspective.
Additionally, for every subset, this opposing exposure is lower for opinion.
Answering the question posed above, even extreme right-leaning readers have




                                                                                     Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
strikingly low opposing partisan exposure (3 percent); thus, their relatively
high within-user variation is a product of reading a variety of centrist and
right-leaning outlets, and not exposure to truly ideologically diverse content.
In contrast, the relatively higher levels of within-user variation associated with
social media and web search (figure 4a) do translate to increased exposure to
opposing viewpoints, though this effect is still small.
   The above-defined measure captures the degree to which individuals are
exposed to partisan content from both sides of the aisle. One might wonder,
though, to what extent are partisans exposed to any cross-cutting sources,
including exposure to moderate news outlets? That is, for individuals who
read predominantly left-leaning articles, what proportion of articles they view
are moderate or right-leaning? And for individuals who read predominantly
right-leaning articles, what proportion of their articles are moderate or left-
leaning? As must necessarily be the case, opposing exposure is larger under
this measure than under the stricter one we use above. Interestingly, however,
even under this looser definition, partisans still get the vast majority of their
news from either right-leaning or left-leaning sources, with relatively little
exposure to even ideologically moderate sources (see figure A5 in the online
appendix).
   Summarizing our results on ideological isolation, we find that individ-
uals generally read publications that are ideologically quite similar, and
moreover, users that regularly read partisan articles are almost exclusively
exposed to only one side of the political spectrum. In this sense, many—
indeed nearly all—users exist in so-called echo chambers. We note, however,
two key differences between our findings and some previous discussions of
this topic (Pariser 2011; Sunstein 2009). First, we show that while social
media and search do appear to contribute to segregation, the lack of within-
user variation seems to be driven primarily by direct browsing. Second,
consistent with Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011), the outlets that dominate
partisan news coverage are still relatively mainstream, ranging from the
New York Times on the left to Fox News on the right; the more extreme
ideological sites (e.g., Breitbart), which presumably benefited from the rise
of online publishing, do not appear to qualitatively impact the dynamics of
news consumption.


DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Returning to our opening question—the effect of recent technological changes
on ideological segregation—there are two competing theories. Some authors
have argued that such changes would lead to “echo chambers” and “filter
318                                                             Flaxman, Goel, and Rao


bubbles,” while others predicted that these technologies would increase expo-
sure to diverse perspectives. We addressed the issue directly by conducting a
large-scale study of online news consumption. We showed that articles found
via social media or web-search engines are indeed associated with higher ideo-




                                                                                                   Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
logical segregation than those an individual reads by directly visiting news sites.
However, we also found, somewhat counterintuitively, that these channels are
associated with greater exposure to opposing perspectives. Finally, we showed
that the vast majority of online news consumption mimicked traditional offline
reading habits, with individuals directly visiting the home pages of their favorite,
typically mainstream, news outlets. We thus uncovered evidence for both sides
of the debate, while also finding that the magnitude of the effects is relatively
modest.
   We conclude by noting some limitations of our study. First, as with past
work (Groseclose and Milyo 2005; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010, 2011), for
methodological tractability we focus on the ideological slant of news out-
lets, as opposed to that of specific articles. As such, we would misinterpret,
for example, the news preferences of an individual who primarily reads
liberal articles from generally conservative sites. We suspect, however,
that this type of behavior is relatively limited, in part because individuals
typically visit ideologically similar news outlets, suggesting that their own
preferences are in line with those of the sites that they frequent. Second, we
focus exclusively on news consumption itself, and not on the consequences
such choices have on, for example, voting behavior or policy preferences.12
Relatedly, social networks can impact political outcomes through means
other than exposure to news, for instance by allowing users to broadcast
their decision to vote (Gerber, Green, and Larimer 2008). Third, it is plau-
sible that the stories that have the greatest impact are disproportionately
discovered via social networks or search engines, meaning that the true
impact of these channels is larger than the raw figures indicate. Fourth, and
related to the previous point, as we have focused our study on the (natural)
subpopulation of active news consumers, it is unclear what impact recent
technological changes have on the majority of individuals who have little
exposure to the news, but who may get that limited amount largely from
social media. Finally, we note that precisely defining causation in this set-
ting is a difficult issue. For example, is the counterfactual thought experi-
ment one in which social media or search engines do not exist? Or perhaps
one imagines the change in experience of a single, prototypical individual
who joins (or is prevented from joining) a social media site? Nevertheless,
despite these limitations, we believe our findings provide an empirical start-
ing point for understanding how novel means of news consumption affect
ideological polarization.

12. Establishing and measuring the causal effects of partisan news exposure is difficult, though
not impossible (Prior 2013).
Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online News                                             319


Supplementary Data
Supplementary data are freely available online at http://poq.oxfordjournals.org/.




                                                                                                   Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
References
Agichtein, Eugene, Eric Brill, and Susan Dumais. 2006. “Improving Web Search Ranking by
  Incorporating User Behavior Information.” Proceedings of the 29th Annual International
  ACM Sigir Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 19–26. ACM.
Athey, Susan, and Markus Mobius. 2012. “The Impact of News Aggregators on Internet News
  Consumption: The Case of Localization.” Working Paper.
Bakshy, Eytan, Solomon Messing, and Lada A. Adamic. 2015. “Exposure to Ideologically Diverse
  News and Opinion on Facebook.” Science 348:1130–1132.
Bakshy, Eytan, Itamar Rosenn, Cameron Marlow, and Lada Adamic. 2012. “The Role of Social
  Networks in Information Diffusion.” Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
  World Wide Web, 519–28. ACM.
Baron, David P. 1994. “Electoral Competition with Informed and Uninformed Voters.” American
  Political Science Review 88:33–47.
Bates, Douglas, Martin Maechler, and Ben Bolker. 2013. lme4: linear mixed-effects models using
  s4 classes. R package version 0.999999–2. http://CRAN. R-project.org/package=lme4.
Baum, Matthew A., and Tim Groeling. 2008. “New Media and the Polarization of American
  Political Discourse.” Political Communication 25:345–65.
Benkler, Yochai. 2006. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets
  and Freedom. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Borra, Erik, and Ingmar Weber. 2012. “Political Insights: Exploring Partisanship in Web Search
  Queries.” First Monday 17.
Dandekar, Pranav, Ashish Goel, and David T. Lee. 2013. “Biased Assimilation, Homophily, and the
  Dynamics of Polarization.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110:5791–5796.
Das, Abhinandan S., Mayur Datar, Ashutosh Garg, and Shyam Rajaram. 2007. “Google
  News Personalization: Scalable Online Collaborative Filtering.” Proceedings of the 16th
  International Conference on World Wide Web, 271–80. ACM.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper & Row.
Garrett, R. Kelly. 2009. “Echo Chambers Online? Politically Motivated Selective Exposure
  among Internet News Users.” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 14:265–85.
Gelman, Andrew, and Jennifer Hill. 2007. Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/
  Hierarchical Models. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2010. “What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from US Daily Newspapers.” Econometrica
  78:35–71.
———. 2011. “Ideological Segregation Online and Offline.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
  126:1799–1839.
Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Christopher W. Larimer. 2008. “Social Pressure and Voter
  Turnout: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment.” American Political Science Review
  102:33–48.
Goel, Sharad, Jake M. Hofman, and M. Irmak Sirer. 2012. “Who Does What on the Web: A Large-
  Scale Study of Browsing Behavior.” Proceedings of the Sixth International AAAI Conference
  on Weblogs and Social Media, 1–8. ACM.
Goel, Sharad, Winter Mason, and Duncan J. Watts. 2010. “Real and Perceived Attitude Agreement
  in Social Networks.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 99:611–21.
Goel, Sharad, Duncan J. Watts, and Daniel G. Goldstein. 2012. “The Structure of Online Diffusion
  Networks.” Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, 623–38.
Groseclose, Tim, and Jeffrey Milyo. 2005. “A Measure of Media Bias.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 120:1191–1237.
320                                                            Flaxman, Goel, and Rao


Hannak, Aniko, Piotr Sapiezynski, Arash Molavi Kakhki, Balachander Krishnamurthy,
  David Lazer, Alan Mislove, and Christo Wilson. 2013. “Measuring Personalization of Web
  Search.” Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on World Wide Web, 527–38.
  International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.
Hosanagar, Kartik, Daniel Fleder, Dokyun Lee, and Andreas Buja. 2013. “Will the Global Village




                                                                                                  Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/poq/article/80/S1/298/2223402 by University of Chicago user on 26 February 2026
  Fracture into Tribes? Recommender Systems and Their Effects on Consumer Fragmentation.”
  Management Science 60:805–23.
Iyengar, Shanto, and Kyu S. Hahn. 2009. “Red Media, Blue Media: Evidence of Ideological
  Selectivity in Media Use.” Journal of Communication 59:19–39.
Lassen, David Dreyer. 2005. “The Effect of Information on Voter Turnout: Evidence from a
  Natural Experiment.” American Journal of Political Science 49:103–18.
Lawrence, Eric, John Sides, and Henry Farrell. 2010. “Self-Segregation or Deliberation? Blog
  Readership, Participation, and Polarization in American Politics.” Perspectives on Politics
  8:141–57.
McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M. Cook. 2001. “Birds of a Feather: Homophily
  in Social Networks.” Annual Review of Sociology 27:415–44.
Messing, Solomon, and Sean J. Westwood. 2012. “Selective Exposure in the Age of Social
  Media: Endorsements Trump Partisan Source Affiliation When Selecting News Online.”
  Communication Research 41:1042–1063.
Moscovici, Serge, and Marisa Zavalloni. 1969. “The Group as a Polarizer of Attitudes.” Journal
  of Personality and Social Psychology 12:125.
Munson, Sean A., and Paul Resnick. 2010. “Presenting Diverse Political Opinions: How and
  How Much.” Proceedings of the Sigchi Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
  1457–1466. ACM.
Myers, David G., and George D. Bishop. 1970. “Discussion Effects on Racial Attitudes.” Science
  169:778–79.
Obendorf, Hartmut, Harald Weinreich, Eelco Herder, and Matthias Mayer. 2007. “Web Page
  Revisitation Revisited: Implications of a Long-Term Click-Stream Study of Browser Usage.”
  Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 597–606. ACM.
Pariser, Eli. 2011. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet is Hiding from You. London: Penguin
  UK.
Pew Research. 2014. “Political Polarization and Media Habits: Technical Report.” http://www.
  journalism.opolarization-media-habits/.
Prior, Markus. 2013. “Media and Political Polarization.” Annual Review of Political Science
  16:101–27.
Schkade, David, Cass R. Sunstein, and Reid Hastie. 2007. “What Happened on Deliberation
  Day?” California Law Review 95:915–40.
Spears, Russell, Martin Lea, and Stephen Lee. 1990. “De-Individuation and Group Polarization in
  Computer-Mediated Communication.” British Journal of Social Psychology 29:121–34.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2009. Republic.com 2.0. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Teevan, Jaime, Daniel Ramage, and Meredith Ringel Morris. 2011. “#TwitterSearch:
  A Comparison of Microblog Search and Web Search.” Proceedings of the Fourth ACM
  International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 35–44. ACM.
Tewksbury, David. 2005. “The Seeds of Audience Fragmentation: Specialization in the Use of
  Online News Sites.” Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 49:332–48.
