How They Vote:
       Issue-Adjusted Models of Legislative Behavior


                 Sean M. Gerrish∗                                    David M. Blei
          Department of Computer Science                    Department of Computer Science
               Princeton University                              Princeton University
                Princeton, NJ 08540                               Princeton, NJ 08540
         sgerrish@cs.princeton.edu                           blei@cs.princeton.edu


                                              Abstract

         We develop a probabilistic model of legislative data that uses the text of the bills to
         uncover lawmakers’ positions on specific political issues. Our model can be used
         to explore how a lawmaker’s voting patterns deviate from what is expected and how
         that deviation depends on what is being voted on. We derive approximate posterior
         inference algorithms based on variational methods. Across 12 years of legislative
         data, we demonstrate both improvement in heldout predictive performance and the
         model’s utility in interpreting an inherently multi-dimensional space.


1   Introduction
Legislative behavior centers around the votes made by lawmakers. Capturing regularity in these votes,
and characterizing patterns of legislative behavior, is one of the main goals of quantitative political
science. Voting behavior exhibits enough regularity that simple statistical models, particularly ideal
point models, easily capture the broad political structure of legislative bodies. However, some
lawmakers do not fit neatly into the assumptions made by these models. In this paper, we develop
a new model of legislative behavior that captures when and how lawmakers vote differently than
expected.
Ideal point models assume that lawmakers and bills are represented as points in a latent space. A
lawmaker’s (stochastic) voting behavior is characterized by the relationship between her position in
this space and the bill’s position [1, 2, 3]. Given the data of how each lawmaker votes on each bill
(known as a roll call), we can use ideal point models to infer the latent position of each lawmaker. In
U.S. politics, these inferred positions reveal the commonly-known political spectrum: right-wing
lawmakers are at one extreme, and left-wing lawmakers are at the other. Figure 1 illustrates example
inferences from an ideal point model.
But there are some votes that ideal point models fail to capture. For example, Ronald Paul, Republican
representative from Texas, and Dennis Kucinich, Democratic representative from Ohio, are poorly
modeled by ideal points because they diverge from the left-right spectrum on issues like foreign
policy. Because some lawmakers deviate from their party on certain issues, their positions on these
issues are not captured by ideal point models.
To this end, we develop the issue-adjusted ideal point model, a latent variable model of roll-call
data that accounts for the contents of the bills that lawmakers are voting on. The idea is that each
lawmaker has both a general position and a sparse set of position adjustments, one for each issue.
The votes on a bill depend on a lawmaker’s position, adjusted for the bill’s content. The text of the
bill encodes the issues it discusses. Our model can be used as an exploratory tool for identifying
   ∗
     Use footnote for providing further information about author (webpage, alternative address)—not for
acknowledging funding agencies.
                        −2             −1             0              1                2   3

           Figure 1: Traditional ideal points separate Republicans (red) from Democrats (blue).

exceptional voting patterns of individual legislators, and it provides a richer description of lawmakers’
voting behavior than the models traditionally used in political science.
In the following sections, we develop our model and describe an approximate posterior inference
algorithm based on variational methods. We analyze six Congresses (12 years) of legislative data
from the United States Congress. We show that our model gives a better fit to legislative data and
provides an interesting exploratory tool for analyzing legislative behavior.

2       Exceptional issue voting
We first review ideal point models of legislative roll call data and discuss their limitations. We then
present a model that accounts for how legislators vote on specific issues.
Modeling politics with ideal points.
Ideal point models are based on item response theory, a statistical theory that models how members
of a population judge a set of items. Applied to voting records, one-dimensional ideal point models
place lawmakers on an interpretable political spectrum. These models are widely used in quantitative
political science [3, 4, 5].
One-dimensional ideal point models posit an ideal point xu ∈ R for each lawmaker u. Each bill d is
characterized by its polarity ad and its popularity bd .1 The probability that lawmaker u votes “Yes”
on bill d is given by the logistic regression
                                   p(vud = yes | xu , ad , bd ) = σ(xu ad + bd ),                    (1)
                   exp(s)
where σ(s) = 1+exp(s)      is the logistic function.2 When the popularity of a bill bd is high, nearly
everyone votes “Yes”; when the popularity is low, nearly everyone votes “No”. When the popularity
is near zero, the probability that a lawmaker votes “Yes” depends on how her ideal point xu interacts
with bill polarity ad . The variables ad , bd , and xu are usually assigned standard normal priors [3].
Given a matrix of votes, we can infer the ideal point of each lawmaker. We illustrate ideal points fit
to votes in the U.S. House of Representatives from 2009-2010 in Figure 1. The model has clearly
separated lawmakers by their political party (colour) and provides an intuitive measure of their
political leanings.
Limitations of ideal point models. A one-dimensional ideal point model fit to the U.S. House from
2009-2010 correctly models 98% of lawmakers’ votes on training data. But it only captures 83% of
Baron Hill’s (D-IN) votes and 80% of Ronald Paul’s (R-TX) votes. Why is this?
The ideal point model assumes that lawmakers are ordered. Each bill d splits them at a cut point
− abdd . Lawmakers to one side of the cut point are more likely to support the bill, and lawmakers to
the other side are likely to reject it. For lawmakers like Paul and Hill, this assumption is too strong
because their voting behavior does not fit neatly into a single ordering. Their location among the
other lawmakers changes with different bills.
Lawmakers do not vote randomly, however. They vote consistently within individual areas of policy,
such as foreign policy and education. For example, Rep. Paul consistently votes against United States
involvement in foreign military engagements, a position that contrasts with other Republicans.
We refer to voting behavior like this as issue voting. An issue is any federal policy area, such as
“financial regulation,” “foreign policy,” “civil liberties,” or “education,” on which lawmakers are
expected to take positions. Lawmakers’ positions on these issues often diverge from their traditional
left/right stances. The model we will develop captures these deviations. Some examples are illustrated
        These are sometimes called the discrimination and difficulty, respectively.
        Many ideal point models use a probit function instead [1, 3].
                                                h ll                     l
                             son         y inic sha ell           son Cau r
                         ack        Bersr Kuc Mar Mitch o   J ohnel Mc anto                         aul
                     se
                        J         t   i     s          a  y
                               ber nn me rry h C oth cha Eric C                               nald P
                 Jes        Ro De Ja Ha An Tim Mi                                          Ro
                                                                                                       Ideal point


                                                                                                   Taxation-adjusted
                                                                                                      ideal point
                           −2                       0                         2        4
                                               Ideal point

Figure 2: In a traditional ideal point model, lawmakers’ ideal points are static (top line of each figure).
In the issue-adjusted ideal point model, lawmakers’ ideal points change when they vote on certain
issues, such as Taxation.


                                                                                                                           ND
     Terrorism         Commemorations                    Transportation                                          Ad,Bd
       terrorist           nation                         transportation
     september             people                              minor                         NW
        attack               life                              print                                                                 NU
        nation              world                                tax               W       Z              θd         Vud        Xu
         york               serve                               land
   terrorist attack        percent                             guard
      hezbolah           community                          coast guard                K                             Zu
   national guard          family                            substitute
                                                                                   β               α

                           Labeled topics                                         The issue-adjusted ideal point model
Figure 3: Left: Top words from topics fit using labeled LDA [6]. Right: the issue-adjusted ideal point
model, which models votes vud from lawmakers and legislative items. Classic item response theory
models votes v using xu and ad , bd . For our work, documents’ issue vectors θ were estimated fit with
a topic model (left of dashed line) using bills’ words w and labeled topics β. Expected issue vectors
Eq [θ|w] are then treated as constants in the issue model (right of dashed line).


in Figure 2; Charles Djou is more similar to Republicans on Taxation (right) and more similar to
Democrats on Health (left), while Ronald Paul is more Republican-leaning on Health and less
extreme on Taxation. The model we will introduce uses lawmakers’ votes and the text of bills to
model deviations like this, on a variety of issues. This allows us to take into account whether a bill
was about Taxation or Education (or both) when predicting a lawmaker’s vote.
Issue-adjusted ideal points.
We now describe the issue-adjusted ideal point model, a new model of lawmaker behavior that takes
into account both the content of the bills and the voting patterns of the lawmakers. We build on the
ideal point model so that each lawmaker’s ideal point can be adjusted for each issue.
Suppose that there are K issues in the political landscape. We will use the words wd of each bill d to
code it with a mixture θd of issues, where each element θdk corresponds to an issue; the components
of θd are positive and sum to one. (These vectors will come from a topic model, which we describe
below.) In our proposed model, each lawmaker is also associated with a K-vector zu ∈ RK , which
describes how her ideal point changes for bills about each issue.
We use these variables in a model based on the traditional ideal point model of Equation 1. As above,
xu is the ideal point for lawmaker u and ad , bd are the polarity and popularity of bill d. In our model,
votes are modeled with a logistic regression

                   p(vud |ad , bd , zu , xu , wd ) = σ (zu> Eq [θd |wd ] + xu )ad + bd ,
                                                                                      
                                                                                                     (2)

where we use an estimate Eq [θd |wd ] of the bill’s issue vector from its words wd as described below.
We put standard normal priors on the ideal points, polarity, and difficulty variables. We use Laplace
priors for zu : p(zuk | λ1 ) ∝ exp (−λ1 ||zuk ||1 ). This enforces a sparse penalty with MAP inference
and a “nearly-sparse” penalty with Bayesian inference. See Figure 3 (left) for the graphical model.
To better understand the model, assume that bill d is only about Finance. This means that θd has a
one in the Finance dimension and zero everywhere else. With a classic ideal point model, a lawmaker
u’s ideal point, xu , gives his position on each issue, including Finance. With the issue-adjusted ideal
point model, his effective ideal point for Finance, xu + zu,Finance , gives his position on Finance. The
adjustment zu,Finance affects how lawmaker u feels about Finance alone. When zu,k = 0 for all u, k,
the model becomes the classic ideal point model.
This model lets us inspect lawmakers’ overall voting patterns by issue. Given a collection of votes
and a coding of bills to issues, posterior estimates of the ideal points and per-issue adjustments give
us a window into voting behavior that is not available to classic ideal point models.
Using Labeled LDA to associate bills with issues.
Equation 2 adjusts a lawmaker’s ideal point by using the conditional expectation of a bill’s thematic
labels θd given its words wd . We estimate this vector using labeled latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) [6]. Labeled LDA is a topic model, a bag-of-words model that assumes a set of themes for the
collection of bills and that each bill exhibits a mixture of those themes. The themes, called topics, are
distributions over a fixed vocabulary. In unsupervised LDA [7] they are learned from the data. In
labeled LDA, they are defined by using an existing tagging scheme. Each tag is associated with a
topic; its distribution is found by taking the empirical distribution of words for documents assigned
to that tag.3 This gives interpretable names (the tags) to the topics.
We used tags provided by the Congressional Research Service [8], which provides subject codes
for all bills passing through Congress. These subject codes describe the bills using phrases which
correspond to traditional issues, such as Civil rights and National security. Each bill may cover
multiple issues, so multiple codes may apply to each bill. (Many bills have more than twenty labels.)
We used the 74 most-frequent issue labels. Figure 3 (right) illustrates the top words from several
of these labeled topics.4 We fit the issue vectors E [θd |wd ] as a preprocessing step. In the issueadjusted ideal point model (Equation 2), E [θd ] was treated as observed when estimating the posterior
distribution p(xu , ad , bd , zd |E [θd |wd ] , vud ). We summarize all 74 issue labels in §A.2.5
Related Work. Item response theory has been used for decades in political science [3, 4, 5]; see
Enelow and Hinich for a historical perspective [9] and Albert for Bayesian treatments of the model
[10]. Some political scientists have used higher-dimensional ideal points, where each legislator is
attached to a vector of ideal points xu ∈ RK and each bill polarization ad takes the same dimension
K [11]. The probability of a lawmaker voting “Yes” is σ(xTu ad + bd ). The principal component of
ideal points explains most of the variance and explains party affiliation. However, other dimensions
are not attached to issues, and interpreting beyond the principal component is painstaking [2].
Recent work in machine learning has provided joint models of legislative text and the bill-making
process. This includes using transcripts of U.S. Congressional floor debates to predict whether
speeches support or oppose pending legislation [12] and predicting whether a bill will survive
congressional committee by incorporating a number of features, including bill text [13]. Other work
has aimed to predict individual votes. Gerrish and Blei aimed to predict votes on bills which had not
yet received any votes [14]. Their model fits ad and bd using supervised topics, but the underlying
voting model was one-dimensional: it could not model individual votes better than a one-dimensional
ideal point model. Wang et al. created a Bayesian nonparametric model of votes and text over time
[15]. We note that these models have different purposes from ours, and neither addresses individuals’
affinity toward issues.
The issue-adjusted model is conceptually more similar to recent models for content recommendation.
Wang and Blei describe a method to recommend academic articles to individuals [16], and Agarwal
and Chen propose a model to match users to Web content [17]. Though they do not consider roll-call
data, these recommendation models also try to match user behavior with textual item content.
     Ramage et al. explore more sophisticated approaches [6], but we found this simplified version to work well.
     After defining topics, we performed two iterations of LDA with variational inference to smooth the topics.
     We refer to specific sections in the supplementary materials (appendix) as §A.#.
3     Posterior estimation
The central computational challenge in this model is to uncover lawmakers’ issue preferences zu
by using the their votes v and bills’ issues θd . We do this by estimating the posterior distribution
p(x, z, a, b|v, θ). Bayesian ideal point models are usually fit with Gibbs sampling [2, 3, 5, 18].
However, fast Gibbs samplers are unavailable for our model because the conditionals needed are not
analytically computable. We estimate the posterior with variational Bayes.
In variational Bayes, we posit a family of distributions {qη } over the latent variables that is likely
to contain a distribution similar to the true posterior [19]. This variational family is indexed by
parameters η, which are fit to minimize the KL divergence between the variational and true posteriors.
Specifically, we let {qη } be the family of fully factorized distributions
                          Y                                         Y
       q(x, z, a, b|η) =      N (xu |x̃u , σx2u )N (zu |z̃u , λzu )   N (ad |ãd , σa2d )N (bd |b̃d , σb2d ), (3)
                            U                                      D

where we parameterize the variational posterior with η = {(x̃u , σx ), (z̃u , σzu ), (ã, σa ), (b̃, σb )}. We
assumed full factorization to make inference tractable. Though simpler than the true posterior, fitted
variational distributions can be excellent proxies for it. The similarity between ideal points fit with
variational inference and MCMC has been demonstrated in Gerrish in Blei [14].
Variational inference usually proceeds by optimizing the variational objective
                       Lη = Eqη [log p(x, z, a, b, v, θ)] − Eqη [log qη (x, z, a, b)]                        (4)
with gradient or coordinate ascent (this is equivalent to optimizing the KL divergence between q and
the posterior). Optimizing this bound is challenging when the expectation is not analytical, which
makes computing the exact gradient ∇η Lη more difficult. We optimize this bound with stochastic
gradient ascent [20, 21], approximating the gradient with samples from qη ;
                                 1 X ∂qη
                      ∇η L η ≈                  (log p(ym , v, θ) − log qη (ym ));                (5)
                                M y ∼q ∂η
                                        m    η


where ym = (xm , zm , am , bm ) is a sample from qη . The algorithm proceeds by following this
stochastic gradient with decreasing step size; we provide further details in §A.1.

4     Analyzing twelve years of U.S. legislative history
We used our model to investigate twelve years of U.S. legislative history. We compare the posterior fit
with this model to the same data fit with traditional ideal points and validate the model quantitatively.
We then provide a closer look at the collection of issues, lawmakers, and bills and explore several
interesting results of the model.

4.1   Data and Experiment Setup

We studied U.S. Senate and House of Representative roll-call votes from 1999 to 2010. This period
spanned Congresses 106 to 111 and covered an historic period in recent U.S. politics, the majority
of which Republican President George W. Bush held office. Bush’s inauguration and the attacks
of September 11th, 2001 marked the first quarter of this period, followed by the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan. Congress became more partisan over this period, and Democratic President Obama was
inaugurated in January 2009.
We provide a more complete summary of statistics for our datasets in §A.3. For context, the median
session we considered had 540 lawmakers, 507 bills, and 201,061 votes in both the House and Senate.
Altogether, there were 865 unique lawmakers, 3,113 bills, and 1,208,709 votes.
Corpus preparation. For each congress, we considered only bills for which votes were explicitly
recorded in a roll-call. We ignored votes on bills for which text was unavailable. To fit the labeled
topic model to each bill, we removed stop words and grouped common phrases as n-grams. All bills
were downloaded from www.govtrack.us [22], a nonpartisan website which provides records
of U.S. Congressional voting. We fit the Senate and House separately for each two-year Congress
because lawmakers’ strategies change at each session boundary.
Table 1: Average log-likelihood of heldout votes using six-fold cross validation. These results cover
Congresses 106 to 111 (1999-2010) with regularization λ = 1. The issue-adjusted model yields
higher heldout log-likelihood for all congresses in both chambers than a standard ideal point model.
Perm. Issue illustrates the issue model fit when bills’ issue labels were randomly permuted. Perm.
Issue is results for the issue model fit using permuted document labels.
                          Model                       Senate
                         Congress    106    107    108     109              110    111
                           Ideal    -0.209 -0.209 -0.182 -0.189            -0.206 -0.182
                           Issue    -0.208 -0.209 -0.181 -0.188            -0.205 -0.180
                        Perm. Issue -0.210 -0.210 -0.183 -0.203            -0.211 -0.186
                                                      House
                           Ideal    -0.168 -0.154 -0.096 -0.120            -0.090 -0.182
                           Issue    -0.166 -0.147 -0.093 -0.116            -0.087 -0.180
                        Perm. Issue -0.210 -0.211 -0.100 -0.123            -0.098 -0.187


4.2   Comparison of classic and exploratory ideal points

How do classic ideal points compare with issue-adjusted ideal points? We fit classic ideal points
to the 111th House (2009 to 2010) to compare them with issue-adjusted ideal points x̃u from the
same period, using regularization λ = 1. The models’ ideal points x̃u were very similar, correlated
at 0.998. While traditional ideal points cleanly separate Democrats and Republicans in this period,
issue-adjusted ideal points provide an even cleaner break between the parties. Although the issueadjusted model is able to use other parameters—lawmakers’ adjustments z̃u —to separate the parties
better, the improvement is much greater than expected by chance (p < 0.001 using a permutation
test).

4.3   Evaluation and significance

We first evaluate the issue-adjusted model by measuring how it can predict held out votes. (This is a
measure of model fitness.) We used six fold cross-validation. For each fold, we computed the average
predictive log-likelihood log p(vudTest |vudTrain ) = log p(vudTest |x̃u , z̃u , ãd , b̃d , Eq [θd |w]) of the test
votes and averaged this across folds. We compared these with the ideal point model, evaluating the
latter in the same way. We give implementation details of the model fit in §A.1.
Note that we cannot evaluate how well this model predicts votes on a heldout bill d. As with the ideal
point model, our model cannot predict ãd , b̃d without votes on d. Gerrish and Blei [14] accomplished
this by predicting ãd and b̃d using the document’s text. (Combining these two models would be
straightforward.)
Performance. We compared the issue-adjusted model’s ability to represent heldout votes with the
ideal point model. We fit the issue-adjusted model to both the House and Senate for Congresses 106
to 110 (1999-2010) with regularization λ = 1. For comparison we also fit an ideal point model to
each of these congresses. In all Congresses and both chambers, the issue-adjusted model represents
heldout votes with higher log-likelihood than an ideal point model. We show these results in Table 1.
Sensitivity to regularization. To measure sensitivity to parameters, we fit the issue-adjusted model
to the 109th Congress (1999-2000) of the House and Senate for a range λ = 0.0001, . . . , 1000 of
                                       2    2    2    2
regularizations. We fixed variance σX    , σZ , σA , σB = exp(−5). The variational implementation
generalized well for the entire range, with heldout log likelihood highest for 1 ≤ λ ≤ 10.
Permutation test. We used a permutation test to understand how the issue-adjusted model improves
upon ideal point models. This test strengthens the argument that issues (and not some other model
change, such as the increase in dimension) help to improve predictive performance. To do this test,
we randomly permuted topic vectors’ document labels to completely remove the relationship between
topics and bills: (θ1 , . . . , θD ) 7→ (θπi (1) . . . θπi (D) ), for five permutations π1 , . . . , π5 . We then fit
the issue model using these permuted document labels. As shown in Table 1, models fit with the
original, unpermuted issues always formed better predictions than models fit with the permuted issues.
From this, we draw the conclusion that issues indeed help the model to represent votes.
                                   n                  ich all ll           son aul r
                               kso               y
                                              err cin rsh he            ohn cC      o                                              aul
                         e Jac        e r t Bnis Kus Ma y Mitc Cao thy J ael M Cant                                            ld P
                   Jes
                       s            b             e    r
                                Ro Den Jam Har Anh Tim Mich
                                                                  o              c                                       na
                                                                             Eri                                      Ro
                                                                                                                                Ideal point


                                                                                                                          Finance-adjusted
                                                                                                                             ideal point

                             −2                           0                             2                       4
                                                         Ideal point


Figure 4: Ideal points xu and issue-adjusted ideal points xu + zuk from the 111th House for the
Finance issue. Republicans (red) saw more adjustment than Democrats (blue).
                    Ron Paul Offsets ẑu,k                                                   Donald Young Offsets ẑu,k
                           Human rights
                                                                               Commemorative events and holidays
                     International affairs
                                                                                            Crime and law enforcement
            Crime and law enforcement                                          Government information and archives

                                   Health                                                                Anniversaries

                                                                                                           Social work
                         Special months
                                                                                                    Natural resources
                                      Law                                                               Appropriations

             Racial and ethnic relations                                                                      Finance

                                                                                                              Children
             House rules and procedure
                                                                                            Racial and ethnic relations
      Public lands and natural resources
                                                                                                                Health
                Congressional sessions                                                                  Land transfers

                                             −3     −1        1        3                                                  −3      −1     1    3
Figure 5: Significant issue adjustments for exceptional senators in Congress 111. Statistically
significant issue adjustments are shown with each ×.

4.4     Analyzing issues, lawmakers, and bills

In this section we take a closer look at how issue adjustments improve on ideal points and demonstrate
how the issue-adjusted ideal point model can be used to analyze specific lawmakers. We focus on an
issue-adjusted model fit to all votes in the 111th House of Representatives (2009-2010).
We can measure the improvement by comparing the training likelihoods of votes in the issue-adjusted
and traditional ideal point models. The training log-likelihood of each vote is
                              Jud = 1{vud =Yes } p − log(1 + exp(p)),                           (6)
                     T
where p = (x̃u + z̃u Eq [θd |w])ãd + b̃d is the log-odds of a vote under the issue adjusted voting
model. The corresponding log-likelihood Iud under the ideal point model is p = x̃u ãd + b̃d .

4.4.1    Per-issue improvement
To inspect the improvement of issue k, for example, we take the sum of the improvement in loglikelihood weighted by each issue: P
                                             Eq [θdv k |w] (Jud − Iud )
                               Impk = Vud P                             .                         (7)
                                                Vud Eq [θdv k |w]
A high value of Impk indicates that issue k is associated with an increase in log-likelihood, while a
low value indicates that the issue saw a decrease in log-likelihood.
Procedural issues such as Congressional sessions (in contrast to substantive issues) were among the
most-improved issues; they were also much more partisan. This is a result predicted by procedural
cartel theory [23, 24, 25, 26], which posits that lawmakers will be more polarized in procedural
votes (which describe how Congress will be run) than substantive votes (the issues discussed during
elections). A substantive issue which was better-predicted was Finance, which we illustrate in
Figure 4. Infrequent issues like Women and Religion were nearly unaffected by lawmakers’ offsets.
In §A.4, we illustrate Impk for all issues.
4.4.2   Per-lawmaker improvement
                                                        P
In the 111th House, the per-lawmaker improvement Impu = D (Jud − Iud ) was invariably positive
or negligible, because each lawmaker has many more parameters in the issue-adjusted model. Some
of most-improved lawmakers were Ron Paul and Donald Young.
We corrected lawmakers’ issue adjustments to account for their left/right leaning and performed
permutation tests as in §4.3 to find which of these corrected adjustments ẑuk were statistically
significant at p < 0.05 (see supplementary section §A.5 for how we obtain ẑuk from zuk and §A.5 for
details on the permutation test). We illustrate these issue adjustments for Paul and Young in Figure 5.
Ron Paul. Paul’s offsets were extreme; he voted more conservatively than expected on Health,
Human rights and International affairs. He voted more liberally on social issues such as Racial and
ethnic relations. The issue-adjusted training accuracy of Paul’s votes increased from 83.8% to 87.9%
with issue offsets, placing him among the two most-improved lawmakers with this model.
The issue-adjusted improvement ImpK (Equation 7), when restricted to Paul’s votes, indicate significant improvement in International affairs and East Asia (he tends to vote against U.S. involvement
in foreign countries); Congressional sessions; Human rights; and Special months (he tends to vote
against recognition of special months and holidays). The model hurt performance related to Law,
Racial and ethnic relations, and Business, none of which were statistically significant issues for Paul.
Donald Young. One of the most exceptional legislators in the 111th House was Alaska Republican
Donald Young. Young stood out in a topic used frequently in House bills about naming local
landmarks. Young voted against the majority of his party (and the House in general) on a series of
largely symbolic bills and resolutions. In an Agriculture topic, Young voted (with only two other
Republicans and against the majority of the House) not to commend “members of the Agri-business
Development Teams of the National Guard [to] increase food production in war-torn countries.”
Young’s divergent voting was also evident in a series of votes against naming various landmarks–such
as post offices–in a topic about such symbolic votes. Notice that Young’s ideal point is not particularly
distinctive: using the ideal point alone, we would not recognize his unique voting behavior.

4.4.3   Per-bill improvement
                               P
Per-bill improvement Impd = U (Jud − Iud ) decreased for some bills. The bill which decreased
the most from the ideal point model in the 111th House was the Consolidated Land, Energy, and
Aquatic Resources Act of 2010 (H.R. 3534). This bill had substantial weight in five issues, with most
in Public lands and natural resources, Energy, and Land transfers, but its placement in many issues
harmed our predictions. This effect—worse performance on bills about many issues—suggests that
methods which represent bills more sparsely may perform better than the current model.


5   Discussion

Traditional models of roll call data cannot capture how individual lawmakers deviate from their latent
position on the political spectrum. In this paper, we developed a model that captures how lawmakers
vary, issue by issue, and used the text of the bills to attach specific votes to specific issues. We
demonstrated, across 12 years of legislative data, that this model better captures lawmaker behavior.
We also illustrated how to use the model as an exploratory tool of legislative data.
Future areas of work include incorporating external behavior by lawmakers. For example, lawmakers
make some (but not all) issue positions public. Many raise campaign funds from interest groups.
Matching these data to votes would help us to understand what drives lawmakers’ positions.


Acknowledgments

We thank the reviewers for their helpful comments. David M. Blei is supported by ONR N00014-111-0651, NSF CAREER 0745520, AFOSR FA9550-09-1-0668, the Alfred P. Sloan foundation, and a
grant from Google.
References
 [1] Keith T. Poole and Howard Rosenthal. Patterns of congressional voting. American Journal of Political
     Science, 35(1):228–278, February 1991.
 [2] Simon Jackman. Multidimensional analysis of roll call data via Bayesian simulation: Identification,
     estimation, inference, and model checking. Political Analysis, 9(3):227–241, 2001.
 [3] Joshua Clinton, Simon Jackman, and Douglas Rivers. The statistical analysis of roll call data,. American
     Political Science Review, 98(2):355–370, 2004.
 [4] Keith T. Poole and Howard Rosenthal. A spatial model for legislative roll call analysis. American Journal
     of Political Science, pages 357–384, 1985.
 [5] Andrew D. Martin and Kevin M. Quinn. Dynamic ideal point estimation via Markov chain Monte Carlo
     for the U.S. Supreme Court, 1953-1999. Political Analysis, 10:134–153, 2002.
 [6] Daniel Ramage, David Hall, Ramesh Nallapati, and Christopher D. Manning. Labeled LDA: A supervised
     topic model for credit attribution in multi-labeled corpora. Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
     Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2009.
 [7] David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
     Learning Research, pages 993–1022, 2003.
 [8] Congressional research service. Available http://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/, 2011.
 [9] James M. Enelow and Melvin J. Hinich. The Spatial Theory of Voting: An Introduction. Cambridge
     University Press, New York, 1984.
[10] James Albert. Bayesian estimation of normal ogive item response curves using Gibbs sampling. Journal of
     Educational Statistics, 17:251–269, 1992.
[11] James J. Heckman and James M. Snyder. Linear probability models of the demand for attributes with an
     empirical application to estimating the preferences of legislators. RAND Journal of Economics, 27(0):142–
     189, 1996.
[12] Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. Get out the vote: Determining support or opposition from
     congressional floor-debate transcripts. In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods on
     Natural Language Processing, 2006.
[13] Tae Yano, Noah A. Smith, and John D. Wilkerson. Textual predictors of bill survival in congressional
     committees. In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
     Computational Linguistics, page 793802, 2012.
[14] Sean Gerrish and David Blei. Predicting legislative roll calls from text. Proceedings of the International
     Conference on Machine Learning, 2011.
[15] Eric Wang, Dehong Liu, Jorge Silva, David Dunson, and Lawrence Carin. Joint analysis of time-evolving
     binary matrices and associated documents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 23:2370–
     2378, 2010.
[16] Chong Wang and David M. Blei. Collaborative topic modeling for recommending scientific articles.
     In Proceedings of the 17th international conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data mining, pages
     448–456, 2011.
[17] Deepak Agarwal and Bee-Chung Chen. fLDA: Matrix factorization through latent Dirichlet allocation.
     Proceedings of the Third ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pages 91–100,
     2010.
[18] Valen E. Johnson and James H. Albert. Ordinal Data Modeling. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999.
[19] Michael I. Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi S. Jaakkola, and Lawrence K. Saul. An introduction to
     variational methods for graphical models. Learning in Graphical Models, pages 183–233, 1999.
[20] Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
     22(3), September 1951.
[21] Leon Bottou and Yann Le Cun. Large scale online learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems, 2004.
[22] Govtrack.us, 2010. Civic Impulse LLC. Available http://www.govtrack.us.
[23] Richard F. Fenno Jr. The Congress and America’s Future. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1965.
[24] Gary W. Cox and Mathew D. McCubbins. Legislative Leviathon. University of California Press., 1993.
[25] Gary W. Cox and Keith T. Poole. On measuring partisanship in roll-call voting: The U.S. House of
     Representatives, 1877-1999. American Journal of Political Science, 46(3):pp. 477–489, 2002.
[26] Gary W. Cox and Mathew D. McCubbins. Setting the Agenda: Responsible Party Government in the U.S.
     House of Representatives. Cambridge University Press, 2005.