PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                                            ARjats.cls       April 18, 2019      13:39


                                                                                                                                                                                    Annual Review of Political Science


                                                                                                                                                                                    The Origins and Consequences
                                                                                                                                                                                    of Affective Polarization in the
                                                                                                                                                                                    United States
                                                                                                                                                                                    Shanto Iyengar,1 Yphtach Lelkes,2
                                                                                                                                                                                    Matthew Levendusky,3 Neil Malhotra,4
                                                                                                                                                                                    and Sean J. Westwood5
                                                                                                                                                                                        Department of Political Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                     Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
                                                                                                                                                                                    Pennsylvania 19104, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                     Department of Political Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
                                                                                                                                                                                    Pennsylvania 19104, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        Department of Government, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire 03755, USA


                                                                                                                            Annu. Rev. Political Sci. 2019. 22:129–46               Keywords
                                                                                                                            First published as a Review in Advance on
                                                                                                                                                                                    affective polarization, partisanship, ideology, social identity, American
                                                                                                                            December 10, 2018
                                                                                                                                                                                    politics
                                                                                                                            The Annual Review of Political Science is online at
                                                                                                                            polisci.annualreviews.org                               Abstract
                                                                                                                            https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-051117While previously polarization was primarily seen only in issue-based terms,
                                                                                                                            073034
                                                                                                                                                                                    a new type of division has emerged in the mass public in recent years: OrdiCopyright © 2019 by Annual Reviews.
                                                                                                                                                                                    nary Americans increasingly dislike and distrust those from the other party.
                                                                                                                            All rights reserved
                                                                                                                                                                                    Democrats and Republicans both say that the other party’s members are
                                                                                                                                                                                    hypocritical, selfish, and closed-minded, and they are unwilling to socialize across party lines. This phenomenon of animosity between the parties
                                                                                                                                                                                    is known as affective polarization. We trace its origins to the power of partisanship as a social identity, and explain the factors that intensify partisan
                                                                                                                                                                                    animus. We also explore the consequences of affective polarization, highlighting how partisan affect influences attitudes and behaviors well outside
                                                                                                                                                                                    the political sphere. Finally, we discuss strategies that might mitigate partisan discord and conclude with suggestions for future work.
PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                           ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019    13:39


                                                                                                                                    INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                    America, we are told, is a divided nation. What does this mean? Political elites—particularly members of Congress—increasingly disagree on policy issues (McCarty et al. 2006), though there is
                                                                                                                                    still an active debate about whether the same is true of the mass public (Abramowitz & Saunders
                                                                                                                                    2008, Fiorina et al. 2008). But regardless of how divided Americans may be on the issues, a new


                                                                                                                                    type of division has emerged in the mass public in recent years: Ordinary Americans increasingly
                                                                                                                                    dislike and distrust those from the other party.
                                                                                                                                        Democrats and Republicans both say that the other party’s members are hypocritical, selfish,
                                                                                                                                    and closed-minded, and they are unwilling to socialize across party lines, or even to partner with
                                                                                                                                    opponents in a variety of other activities. This phenomenon of animosity between the parties is
                                                                                                                                    known as affective polarization.
                                                                                                                                        We trace the origins of affective polarization to the power of partisanship as a social identity,
                                                                                                                                    and explain the factors that intensify partisan animus. We also explore the consequences of affective polarization, highlighting how partisan affect influences attitudes and behaviors well outside
                                                                                                                                    the political sphere. Finally, we discuss strategies that might mitigate partisan discord, and conclude with some suggestions for future work.


                                                                                                                                    AFFECTIVE POLARIZATION: AN OUTGROWTH OF PARTISAN
                                                                                                                                    SOCIAL IDENTITY
                                                                                                                                    Homo sapiens is a social species; group affiliation is essential to our sense of self. Individuals instinctively think of themselves as representing broad socioeconomic and cultural categories rather than
                                                                                                                                    as distinctive packages of traits (Brewer 1991, Tajfel 1978). Political parties often form along these
                                                                                                                                    lines precisely because group identities are so stable and significant (Lipset & Rokkan 1967).
                                                                                                                                        In the United States, partisanship means identifying with the Democrat group or the Republican group (Green et al. 2002, Huddy et al. 2015). A host of behavioral consequences flow from that
                                                                                                                                    identification. When we identify with a political party, we instinctively divide up the world into an
                                                                                                                                    in group (our own party) and an out group (the opposing party, or out party; see Tajfel & Turner
                                                                                                                                    1979). A vast literature in social psychology demonstrates that any such in-group/out-group distinction, even one based on the most trivial of shared characteristics, triggers both positive feelings
                                                                                                                                    for the in group and negative evaluations of the out group (see, e.g., Billig & Tajfel 1973). The
                                                                                                                                    more salient the group to the sense of personal identity, the stronger these intergroup divisions
                                                                                                                                    (Gaertner et al. 1993).
                                                                                                                                        Partisanship is a particularly salient and powerful identifier for two main reasons. First, it is
                                                                                                                                    acquired at a young age and rarely changes over the life cycle, notwithstanding significant shifts
                                                                                                                                    in personal circumstances (Sears 1975). Second, political campaigns—the formal occasions for
                                                                                                                                    expressing one’s partisan identity—recur frequently and last for many months (or even years) in
                                                                                                                                    the contemporary United States. Indeed, some even argue that modern governance is effectively
                                                                                                                                    always about the next campaign (Lee 2016), meaning that individuals constantly receive partisan
                                                                                                                                    cues from elites. It is no surprise, therefore, that ordinary Americans see the political world through
                                                                                                                                    a partisan prism.
                                                                                                                                        From a social identity perspective, affective polarization is a natural offshoot of this sense of
                                                                                                                                    partisan group identity: “the tendency of people identifying as Republicans or Democrats to view
                                                                                                                                    opposing partisans negatively and copartisans positively” (Iyengar & Westwood 2015, p. 691).
                                                                                                                                    However, changes in the contemporary political and media environment have exacerbated the
                                                                                                                                    divide in recent years, as we explain below.


                                                                                                                             130    Iyengar et al.


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                                        ARjats.cls   April 18, 2019    13:39


                                                                                                                                Our conceptualization of polarization as rooted in affect and identity stands in contrast to a
                                                                                                                            long tradition in political science of studying polarization as the difference between the policy
                                                                                                                            positions of Democrats and Republicans (Fiorina et al. 2005). Indeed, there is ongoing scholarly disagreement over the extent of such ideological polarization. Some scholars argue that the
                                                                                                                            mass public has polarized on the issues, citing a decline in the number of ideological moderates


                                                                                                                            and a near doubling of the average distance between the ideological self-placement of nonactivist
                                                                                                                            Democrats and Republicans between 1972 and 2004 (Abramowitz & Saunders 2008). Others dispute this description of the masses, maintaining that the median citizen remains a centrist rather
                                                                                                                            than an extremist on most issues (Fiorina et al. 2008).
                                                                                                                                We do not take a position on this ongoing debate. Rather, we argue that affective polarization is
                                                                                                                            largely distinct from the ideological divide, and that extremity in issue opinions is not a necessary
                                                                                                                            condition for affective polarization (Iyengar et al. 2012, Mason 2015). Indeed, in some settings,
                                                                                                                            affective polarization can increase while ideological divisions shrink (Levendusky & Malhotra
                                                                                                                            2016a). While there are important connections between affective and ideological polarization
                                                                                                                            (Abramowitz & Webster 2016), to which we return below, they are theoretically and empirically
                                                                                                                            distinct concepts. In this article, we focus exclusively on the affective dimension of polarization.


                                                                                                                            HOW DO WE MEASURE AFFECTIVE POLARIZATION?
                                                                                                                            Scholars have used three main classes of techniques to measure affective polarization: survey selfreports of partisan affect, implicit or subconscious tests of partisan bias, and behavioral measures
                                                                                                                            of interpersonal trust and group favoritism or discrimination based on partisan cues.


                                                                                                                            Survey Self-Reports
                                                                                                                            Survey self-reports are the most basic and widely used measure of affective polarization in the
                                                                                                                            literature. While scholars have relied on several different survey items, the most central is the
                                                                                                                            “feeling thermometer” question from the American National Election Study (ANES) time series. The feeling thermometer was originally created as a “neutrally worded means of eliciting
                                                                                                                            responses to a wide variety of candidates” (Weisberg & Rusk 1970, p. 1168) but has become the
                                                                                                                            primary vehicle for measuring affect toward a wide range of groups in the electorate. Typically,
                                                                                                                            respondents are asked to rate Democrats and Republicans (or the Democratic and Republican
                                                                                                                            Parties) on a 101-point scale ranging from cold (0) to warm (100). Affective polarization is then
                                                                                                                            computed as the difference between the score given to the party of the respondent and the score
                                                                                                                            given to the opposing party, which we also refer to as the out party. In the ANES time series (see
                                                                                                                            Figure 1), this measure shows a significant increase in affective polarization since 1980, rising
                                                                                                                            from 22.64 degrees in 1978 to 40.87 degrees in 2016 (Iyengar et al. 2012). It is particularly noteworthy that (a) the change is not that people like their own party more over time; rather, there
                                                                                                                            is an increase in out-party animus, especially in recent years, and (b) affective polarization actually decreased between 2012 and 2016. Other over-time measures of partisan affect show similar
                                                                                                                            patterns (e.g., Pew Research Center 2017).
                                                                                                                                Although the feeling thermometer is the workhorse survey item, scholars have also adopted
                                                                                                                            alternative measures. Levendusky (2018a) and Levendusky & Malhotra (2016a) use trait ratings
                                                                                                                            of party supporters to measure affective discord: Are they intelligent, open-minded, and generous,
                                                                                                                            or hypocritical, selfish, and mean (see also Garrett et al. 2014, Iyengar et al. 2012)? Levendusky
                                                                                                                            & Malhotra (2016a) also count the number of things people can bring to mind that they like and
                                                                                                                            dislike about the parties as a quasi-behavioral measure. Other scholars have substituted the extent


                                                                                                                                                                        www.annualreviews.org • Affective Polarization in the United States   131


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                           ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019                               13:39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Favorable


                                                                                                                                                     Feeling thermometer rating
                                                                                                                                                                                        In−party feeling


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Neutral feeling
                                                                                                                                                                                        Out−party feeling
                                                                                                                                                                                        Affective polarization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Unfavorable
                                                                                                                                                                                          1980 1984        1988   1992   1996   2000 2004   2008 2012     2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Election year
                                                                                                                                    Figure 1
                                                                                                                                    Using data from the American National Election Study (ANES), the figure shows trends in average feeling
                                                                                                                                    for the party participants identify with (in-party) and for the opposing party (out-party). In-party feeling
                                                                                                                                    (green line) has remained high over the period plotted, though it has decreased slightly in recent years.
                                                                                                                                    Out-party feeling (purple line) has decreased dramatically, especially after 1990. We also plot affective
                                                                                                                                    polarization (gray line)—the difference between mean in-party feeling and mean out-party feeling—which
                                                                                                                                    shows a significant increase over time (Iyengar et al. 2012), mainly due to an increase in animus against the
                                                                                                                                    out-party. However, it is worth noting that affective polarization actually decreased between 2012 and 2016
                                                                                                                                    due to decreases in feeling toward the in-party.


                                                                                                                                    to which the presidential candidates elicit either positive or negative emotional responses as the
                                                                                                                                    metric for assessing affective polarization (Lelkes et al. 2017).
                                                                                                                                        A less obtrusive measure of partisan affect is social distance, the extent to which individuals feel
                                                                                                                                    comfortable interacting with out-group members in various settings. If partisanship is an important social identity in its own right, partisans should be averse to entering into close interpersonal
                                                                                                                                    relations with their opponents. Iyengar et al. (2012) show that Americans have become increasingly averse to the prospect of their child marrying someone from the opposing party. In 1960,
                                                                                                                                    only 4–5% were upset with their child marrying someone from the out party, but that figure
                                                                                                                                    had jumped to one-third of Democrats and one-half of Republicans by 2010 (Iyengar et al. 2012,
                                                                                                                                    pp. 416–18). However, Klar et al. (2018) show that social distance measures conflate partisan animus and a dislike of politics: When people are asked about their child marrying someone from
                                                                                                                                    the opposing party, they assume that partisanship is a salient part of that person’s identity. When
                                                                                                                                    respondents are told prior to the question that the potential spouse is largely apolitical, their opposition falls sharply. Similarly, their opposition to same-party marriage rises when they are told
                                                                                                                                    the person frequently discusses politics. This suggests that part of the opposition to interparty
                                                                                                                                    marriage (and other types of social distance) may stem from the assumption that people labeled
                                                                                                                                    Republicans and Democrats are the extremists portrayed in the media (Levendusky & Malhotra
                                                                                                                                    2016a), rather than their more typical apolitical brethren. Alternatively, the finding may reflect
                                                                                                                                    the well-known association between politics and disagreement; most people prefer to be in agreeable relationships. However, the critique by Klar et al. (2018) could not explain why these social
                                                                                                                                    distance measures have changed over time, unless the desire for political agreement has increased.
                                                                                                                                    If this is the case, it would also indicate a rise in affective polarization. Understanding the precise
                                                                                                                                    limitations of social distance measures is an important topic for future research.

                                                                                                                             132    Iyengar et al.


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                                        ARjats.cls    April 18, 2019    13:39


                                                                                                                            Implicit Measures
                                                                                                                            A major limitation to survey-based indicators of partisan affect is that they are reactive and susceptible to intentional exaggeration/suppression based on normative pressures. Unlike race, gender,
                                                                                                                            and other social divides where group-related attitudes and behaviors are subject to social norms
                                                                                                                            (Maccoby & Maccoby 1954), there are no corresponding pressures to temper disapproval of political opponents. If anything, the rhetoric and actions of political leaders demonstrate that hostility
                                                                                                                            directed at the opposition is acceptable and often appropriate. Implicit measures are known to
                                                                                                                            be much harder to manipulate than explicit self-reports; they are therefore more valid and less
                                                                                                                            susceptible to impression management (Boysen et al. 2006).
                                                                                                                                Iyengar & Westwood (2015) developed an Implicit Association Test to document unconscious
                                                                                                                            partisan bias, based on the brief version of the race IAT. Their results showed that implicit bias is
                                                                                                                            ingrained; approximately 70% of Democrats and Republicans show a bias in favor of their party.
                                                                                                                            Interestingly, implicit bias is less pronounced than explicit bias as measured through survey questions; 91% of Republicans and 75% of Democrats in the same study explicitly evaluated their
                                                                                                                            party more favorably.
                                                                                                                                To place the results from their party IAT in context, Iyengar & Westwood (2015) also administered the race IAT. Relative to implicit racial bias, implicit partisan bias is more widespread.
                                                                                                                            The difference in the D-score—the operational indicator of implicit bias—across the party divide
                                                                                                                            was 0.50, while the corresponding difference in implicit racial bias across the racial divide was
                                                                                                                            only 0.18 (see also Theodoridis 2017 for an application of implicit measures to the study of partisanship). Ryan (2017) shows that when explicit political preferences are weak, these underlying
                                                                                                                            implicit preferences drive political decision making.


                                                                                                                            Behavioral Measures
                                                                                                                            Of course, one can also critique measures of implicit attitudes, especially on the grounds that they
                                                                                                                            are weak predictors of relevant behaviors. Given the limits of the attitudinal approach, scholars
                                                                                                                            have turned to behavioral manifestations of partisan animus in both lab and naturalistic settings.
                                                                                                                            Iyengar & Westwood (2015) and Carlin & Love (2013) introduce economic games as a platform
                                                                                                                            for documenting the extent to which partisans are willing to endow or withhold financial rewards
                                                                                                                            from players who either share or do not share their partisan affiliation. Using both the trust game
                                                                                                                            and the dictator game, this work measures partisan bias as the difference between financial allocations to copartisans and opposing partisans. Results show that copartisans consistently receive
                                                                                                                            a bonus while opposing partisans are subject to a financial penalty.
                                                                                                                               Iyengar & Westwood (2015) further document the extent of affective polarization by comparing the effects of partisan and racial cues in nonpolitical settings. In one study, they asked participants to select one of two candidates for a college scholarship. The candidates—both high school
                                                                                                                            students—had similar academic credentials, but differed in their ethnicity (white or African American) or party (Democrat or Republican). The results indicated little racial bias; whites, in fact,
                                                                                                                            preferred the African American applicant (55.8%). But 79.2% of Democrats picked the Democratic applicant and 80% of Republicans picked the Republican applicant. These results held even
                                                                                                                            when the out-party candidate had a significantly higher grade point average (4.0 versus 3.5); the
                                                                                                                            probability of a partisan selecting the more qualified out-party candidate was never above 30%.
                                                                                                                               The scholarship study showed that partisan cues exert strong leverage over nonpolitical attitudes. This phenomenon of affective spillover has been documented in a variety of domains including evaluations of job applicants (Gift & Gift 2015), dating behavior (Huber & Malhotra 2017),
                                                                                                                            and online labor markets (McConnell et al. 2018). This work consistently shows that partisanship


                                                                                                                                                                         www.annualreviews.org • Affective Polarization in the United States   133


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                           ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019   13:39


                                                                                                                                    has bled into the nonpolitical sphere, driving ordinary citizens to reward copartisans and penalize
                                                                                                                                    opposing partisans, a point to which we return below.
                                                                                                                                        A major limitation of implicit and behavioral measures is the lack of historical survey data.
                                                                                                                                    Despite the limitations of feeling thermometers and social distance measures, an advantage is that
                                                                                                                                    they have been asked for long periods of time, allowing researchers to document changes over


                                                                                                                                    time.
                                                                                                                                        Regardless of measurement technique, the literature consistently documents an affective and
                                                                                                                                    behavioral divide between the in party and the out party. Further measurement exercises show
                                                                                                                                    that while affective polarization predicts both political and private behavior, it has yet to rise to the
                                                                                                                                    level of overt discrimination as conceptualized in social psychology (Lelkes & Westwood 2017).
                                                                                                                                    Understanding the limits to affective polarization, and what constrains these sentiments, therefore,
                                                                                                                                    is another important realm for future study.


                                                                                                                                    ORIGINS AND CAUSES OF AFFECTIVE POLARIZATION
                                                                                                                                    Several features of the contemporary environment have exacerbated partisans’ proclivity to divide
                                                                                                                                    the world into a liked in group (one’s own party) and a disliked out group (the opposing party).
                                                                                                                                    First, in the last 50 years, the percentage of sorted partisans, i.e., partisans who identify with the
                                                                                                                                    party most closely reflecting their ideology, has steadily increased (Levendusky 2009). When most
                                                                                                                                    Democrats are liberals and most Republicans are conservatives, copartisans are less likely to encounter conflicting political ideas and identities (Roccas & Brewer 2002) and are more likely to
                                                                                                                                    see nonidentifiers as socially distant. Sorting likely leads people to perceive both opposing partisans and copartisans as more extreme than they really are, with misperceptions about opposing
                                                                                                                                    partisans being more acute (Levendusky & Malhotra 2016b). As partisan and ideological identities became increasingly aligned, other salient social identities, including race and religion, also
                                                                                                                                    converged with partisanship. White evangelicals, for instance, are overwhelmingly Republican today, and African Americans overwhelmingly identify as Democrats. This decline of cross-cutting
                                                                                                                                    identities is at the root of affective polarization, according to Mason (2015, 2018b). She has shown
                                                                                                                                    that those with consistent partisan and ideological identities became more hostile toward the out
                                                                                                                                    party without necessarily changing their ideological positions, and those who have aligned religious, racial, and partisan identities react more emotionally to information that threatens their
                                                                                                                                    partisan identities or issue stances. In essence, sorting has made it much easier for partisans to
                                                                                                                                    make generalized inferences about the opposing side, even if those inferences are inaccurate.
                                                                                                                                        While reinforcing social identities seem to be a key factor explaining affective polarization,
                                                                                                                                    other work finds that ideological polarization also impacts affective polarization (Rogowski &
                                                                                                                                    Sutherland 2016, Bougher 2017). Observational time-series and panel data indicate that increasing
                                                                                                                                    ideological extremity and constraint are both associated with stronger partisan affect (Bougher
                                                                                                                                    2017), and experimental work that manipulates the degree to which a candidate is perceived as
                                                                                                                                    liberal or conservative also impacts affective polarization (Rogowski & Sutherland 2016, Webster
                                                                                                                                    & Abramowitz 2017).
                                                                                                                                        The high-choice media environment and the proliferation of partisan news outlets are frequently blamed for the current polarized environment (e.g., Lelkes et al. 2017). The argument is
                                                                                                                                    that partisan news activates partisan identities and consequent feelings toward the political parties. One feature of any social identity is that, in order to fit in with the group, identifiers must
                                                                                                                                    adopt the attitudes of prototypical in-group members (Hogg 2001). Partisan outlets—many of
                                                                                                                                    which depict the opposing party in harsh terms, often comparing out partisans to Nazis and Communists (Berry & Sobieraj 2014) and focusing disproportionately on out-party scandals (real or
                                                                                                                                    imagined)—inculcate hostility toward the out group (Puglisi & Snyder 2011).

                                                                                                                             134    Iyengar et al.


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                                        ARjats.cls    April 18, 2019     13:39


                                                                                                                                Further, the lack of balanced content in these outlets may persuade viewers to adopt extreme
                                                                                                                            ideological positions (Levendusky 2013), which, in turn, increases affective polarization (Rogowski
                                                                                                                            & Sutherland 2016, Webster & Abramowitz 2017). While both survey and experimental research
                                                                                                                            support this hypothesis (Stroud 2010, Levendusky 2013), the precise mechanism is unclear because
                                                                                                                            the treatment is typically exposure to an outlet or cable news show, making it difficult to tease apart


                                                                                                                            the effects of exposure to extreme policy positions, the priming of partisanship, or the cultivation
                                                                                                                            of hostility toward the other side.
                                                                                                                                It is far from clear, however, that partisan news actually causes affective polarization. First, those
                                                                                                                            who are the most polarized are, of course, more motivated to watch partisan news (Arceneaux &
                                                                                                                            Johnson 2013). Arguably, therefore, partisan news has little impact on polarization. Levendusky
                                                                                                                            (2013), however, finds that exposure to partisan news makes those with extreme attitudes even
                                                                                                                            more extreme.
                                                                                                                                A second mitigating factor is that partisans may not have a clear preference for information
                                                                                                                            that is consistent with their ideology or identity. While some studies have found evidence of selective exposure to partisan information (e.g., Stroud 2011), others find that Americans typically
                                                                                                                            select ideologically neutral content (e.g., Gentzkow & Shapiro 2011). So even if partisan news
                                                                                                                            or other identity-consistent information heightens affective polarization, few people may actually
                                                                                                                            limit their exposure to sources representing a particular identity or ideology (see also Bakshy et al.
                                                                                                                            2015).
                                                                                                                                The relationship between internet access, a major route to partisan media, and affective polarization is similarly contested. Using state Right-of-Way laws as an instrument for internet access,
                                                                                                                            Lelkes et al. (2017) find a small positive relationship between Internet access and affective polarization. In contrast, Boxell et al. (2017) find that affective polarization has increased the most
                                                                                                                            among those least likely to use social media and the internet. Given these inconsistent results, it
                                                                                                                            is too early to conclude that internet usage (and the availability of a wider array of information)
                                                                                                                            plays a definite role in the growth of affective polarization.
                                                                                                                                While the high-choice media environment of cable television and the internet allows those
                                                                                                                            uninterested in politics to ignore it, exposure to partisan news can occur in other ways. First, as
                                                                                                                            people spend more time online and on social network sites, they are more likely to be inadvertently
                                                                                                                            exposed to polarizing content by others in their network (Bakshy et al. 2015). Additionally, people
                                                                                                                            may be exposed to partisan news content indirectly through discussion with peers. Druckman et al.
                                                                                                                            (2018) randomly assigned subjects to watch partisan media and later participate in discussions with
                                                                                                                            those who did not watch the stimuli. Those in groups that contained people who watched the
                                                                                                                            stimuli were significantly more (ideologically) polarized than those who were not in such groups.
                                                                                                                            This result suggests that partisan media—and other related outlets—may play a more significant
                                                                                                                            role than initially thought because their messages can be amplified by social networks and two-step
                                                                                                                            communication flows.
                                                                                                                                Partisan commentary is not the only type of media content that can polarize Americans.
                                                                                                                            First, the mainstream media has increasingly focused on polarization. According to one content
                                                                                                                            analysis, there are roughly 20% more stories about polarization in America today than there were
                                                                                                                            at the turn of the twenty-first century (Levendusky & Malhotra 2016a). Experimental evidence
                                                                                                                            suggests that coverage of polarization increases affective polarization but decreases ideological
                                                                                                                            polarization (Levendusky & Malhotra 2016a).
                                                                                                                                Political campaigns also exacerbate partisan tensions (Sood & Iyengar 2016). Across recent
                                                                                                                            election cycles, people were 50–150% more affectively polarized by election day than they were
                                                                                                                            a year earlier. Additionally, by identifying people who live in the designated market area of a
                                                                                                                            neighboring battleground state, Sood & Iyengar (2016) show that political advertisements, and
                                                                                                                            especially negative advertising, have particularly strong effects on affective polarization (see also

                                                                                                                                                                          www.annualreviews.org • Affective Polarization in the United States   135


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                           ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019     13:39


                                                                                                                                    Iyengar et al. 2012). Political campaigns may heighten tensions in a number of ways. For instance,
                                                                                                                                    campaigns make partisanship more salient (Michelitch & Utych 2018) and regularly run ads that
                                                                                                                                    portray the other side as an existential threat.
                                                                                                                                        Finally, increasingly homogeneous online and offline interpersonal networks may be contributing to affective polarization. As partisans become more isolated from each other (Gimpel & Hui


                                                                                                                                    2015) in their real and virtual lives, they are more likely to encounter only like-minded voices, further exacerbating polarization. While provocative, and certainly part of the popular discourse, the
                                                                                                                                    scholarly evidence on social homophily is mixed. For one thing, there is little evidence that people are increasingly living in partisan enclaves (Mummolo & Nall 2017). However, it is clear that
                                                                                                                                    families have become more politically homogeneous. Spousal agreement on party affiliation now
                                                                                                                                    exceeds 80%, with parent–offspring agreement at 75%, both figures representing large increases
                                                                                                                                    in family agreement since the 1960s (Iyengar et al. 2018). In the case of online behavior, as we
                                                                                                                                    noted above, the first analysis of partisan segregation in the audience for online news (Gentzkow &
                                                                                                                                    Shapiro 2011) showed that most Americans encountered diverse points of view. More recent work,
                                                                                                                                    however, suggests that the polarization of online news audiences has increased, especially with respect to election-related news. All told, therefore, it is premature to reach any firm conclusions
                                                                                                                                    about the role of “echo chambers,” either in person or online, as causes of affective polarization.


                                                                                                                                    THE NONPOLITICAL CONSEQUENCES OF AFFECTIVE
                                                                                                                                    POLARIZATION
                                                                                                                                    One major concern is that partisan animus might spill over and affect behaviors and attitudes
                                                                                                                                    outside the political realm. It is one thing if partisan disagreements are confined to political contestation, but quite another if everyday interactions and life choices are compromised by politics.
                                                                                                                                        For instance, does partisanship affect the social relations we seek to enter into, such as friendships, romantic relationships, or marriages? Since partisanship increasingly signals core values and
                                                                                                                                    worldview, it is unsurprising that partisanship is used to screen social partners. People may also
                                                                                                                                    perceive copartisans to be more physically attractive (Nicholson et al. 2016).1 Longitudinal survey data have shown that people self-report that they are less comfortable with social relationships
                                                                                                                                    with out partisans. According to Iyengar et al. (2012), the percentage of Americans who would be
                                                                                                                                    somewhat or very unhappy if their child married someone of the opposite party has increased by
                                                                                                                                    about 35 percentage points over the last 50 years, with Republicans especially sensitive to crossparty marriage. These increases are much larger in the United States than in a similar advanced
                                                                                                                                    democracy, the United Kingdom. And these preferences appear substantively larger than apolitical benchmarks, such as the 17–20% of people who would not want their child marrying a fan of
                                                                                                                                    an opposing baseball team (Hersh 2016). Behavioral data from smartphone activity confirms that
                                                                                                                                    Americans are averse to cross-partisan dialogue within their families, especially in the wake of the
                                                                                                                                    2016 election (Chen & Rohla 2018).
                                                                                                                                        Although people may state that they do not want to enter into relationships with people of
                                                                                                                                    the opposing party, does their behavior match their self-reports? Observational survey data have
                                                                                                                                    long found that marriages are much more politically homogeneous than one would expect by
                                                                                                                                    chance (Stoker 1995). This finding has been validated in large voter files, which show that 80.5%


                                                                                                                                    1 However, Huber & Malhotra (2017) run similar experiments to Nicholson et al. (2016), including more contextual information along the lines of a conjoint design, and find no effect of shared partisanship on perceived
                                                                                                                                    attractiveness.


                                                                                                                             136    Iyengar et al.


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                                         ARjats.cls      April 18, 2019      13:39


                                                                                                                            of married couples share a party identification (Iyengar et al. 2018), and that selection rather than
                                                                                                                            convergence over time explains spousal agreement.2
                                                                                                                                Of course, any data collected after people have married is of limited utility for assessing whether
                                                                                                                            people prefer to engage in romantic relationships with people of the opposing party. This is because homophily can be induced by various factors unrelated to selection: postmarriage conversion, the influence of shared environment, or structural features of the available partner pool. As
                                                                                                                            a result, some recent research has attempted to use data from online dating websites to assess
                                                                                                                            whether political homophily in relationships is due to selection based on political profiles. Huber
                                                                                                                            & Malhotra (2017) leverage data from an online dating website where they have access to the profile characteristics of daters as well as their messaging behavior. They find that partisan matching
                                                                                                                            increases the likelihood of a dyad exchanging messages by 9.5%. To put that finding into context, analogous figures for dating pairs matched by level of education and religion are 10.6% and
                                                                                                                            50.0%, respectively. On the one hand, these substantive effects might be smaller than survey data
                                                                                                                            would imply. On the other hand, partisan sorting seems to be on a par with socioeconomic status, long considered the major basis for the selection of long-term partners. Huber & Malhotra
                                                                                                                            (2017) corroborate this finding with data from a survey experiment where partisanship is randomly
                                                                                                                            manipulated in the dating profiles.
                                                                                                                                The findings of Huber & Malhotra (2017) appear to conflict with other data from public online
                                                                                                                            dating profiles (Klofstad et al. 2013). Although these studies do not have access to the messaging
                                                                                                                            behavior going on behind the scenes, they find that online daters usually do not advertise their
                                                                                                                            political preferences, which would seem inconsistent with the idea of people actively selecting
                                                                                                                            on this information. However, dating behavior may be changing. The dating website eHarmony
                                                                                                                            reported that dating profiles typically did not report political affiliation prior to the 2016 presidential election (24.6% of women and 16.5% of men). After the 2016 presidential election, these
                                                                                                                            figures increased to 68% and 47%, respectively (Kiefer 2017), suggesting that in the wake of that
                                                                                                                            divisive election, a sea change may be under way.
                                                                                                                                If the thought of a romantic relationship with an opposing partisan is a bridge too far, one might
                                                                                                                            ask whether people are more tolerant in friendship. Survey data from the Pew Research Center
                                                                                                                            (2017) suggest this is unlikely; about 64% of Democrats and 55% of Republicans say they have
                                                                                                                            “just a few” or “no” close friends who are from the other political party. Huber & Malhotra (2017)
                                                                                                                            also find in their survey experiment that discordant partisanship decreases people’s likelihood of
                                                                                                                            being friends with someone even if they do not want a romantic relationship. Chopik & Motyl
                                                                                                                            (2016) find that living in a politically incongruent area made it more difficult for people to form
                                                                                                                            friendships. Behavioral data seem to confirm that people seek to hide their partisanship from peers
                                                                                                                            when they are living in a politically discordant location. Using data on political donations, PerezTruglia & Cruces (2017) find that people signal their conformity to opposite-party peers via donations, perhaps out of fear of social reprisal. Finally, Facebook data show that the median proportion
                                                                                                                            of friendship groups that are ideologically discordant is only about 20% (Bakshy et al. 2015).
                                                                                                                                If people seek to socialize with people they are likely to agree with politically, it stands to
                                                                                                                            reason that they may choose to locate themselves near like-minded individuals. Indeed, survey
                                                                                                                            data suggest that people self-report desiring to move to locations with fellow partisans (Gimpel &
                                                                                                                            Hui 2015). The idea of residential sorting based on partisanship was first popularized by Bishop
                                                                                                                            (2009), who reported descriptive statistics showing that counties had become more politically


                                                                                                                            2 Using the Catalyst subsample, Hersh & Ghitza (2019) find somewhat lower spousal agreement (70%), but

                                                                                                                            this is still significantly higher than chance alone would predict.


                                                                                                                                                                              www.annualreviews.org • Affective Polarization in the United States   137


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                           ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019   13:39


                                                                                                                                    homogeneous over time. However, Klinkner (2004) challenged much of this data analysis by
                                                                                                                                    showing that residential sorting has not increased significantly over the past few decades when
                                                                                                                                    one analyzes party registration data instead of presidential vote returns. Further, in contrast to
                                                                                                                                    Gimpel & Hui (2015), Mummolo & Nall (2017) show that revealed preferences concerning place
                                                                                                                                    of residence diverge from stated preferences. Although people claim they would like to move to a


                                                                                                                                    more politically compatible area (e.g., Democrats claiming they would move to Canada following
                                                                                                                                    Bush’s 2004 reelection), mobility data suggest that people are not moving for political reasons,
                                                                                                                                    largely because nonpolitical factors—such as the quality of the public schools—dominate the
                                                                                                                                    decisions of Democrats and Republicans alike.
                                                                                                                                        Thus far, we have mainly explored if partisanship spills over into people’s social interactions.
                                                                                                                                    But can partisanship also distort economic behavior? Michelitch’s (2015) pioneering work in this
                                                                                                                                    area found that Ghanaian taxi drivers accept lower prices from copartisans and demand higher
                                                                                                                                    prices from counter-partisans. Specifically, noncoethnic counter-partisans pay 16% more and noncoethnic copartisans 6% more in taxi fares than coethnic copartisans, suggesting an interaction
                                                                                                                                    between ethnicity and partisanship. McConnell et al. (2018) conducted a field experiment in the
                                                                                                                                    United States in which people were provided the opportunity to buy a heavily discounted gift
                                                                                                                                    card. Some buyers were assigned to conditions in which they learned that the seller was either
                                                                                                                                    a copartisan or counter-partisan. The authors found no evidence of out-group animus; the purchasing rate remained stable across same-party and opposite-party sellers. However, interacting
                                                                                                                                    with a copartisan seller nearly doubled the purchasing price of the gift card. The effects were even
                                                                                                                                    larger among strong partisans. Panagopoulos et al. (2016), in contrast, find evidence of out-group
                                                                                                                                    animus: 15–20% of participants in their study were less willing to accept a gift card from a company that gives PAC donations to the opposing party. While Panagopoulos et al. (2016) observe
                                                                                                                                    larger effect sizes than McConnell et al. (2018), that could be because their study took place within
                                                                                                                                    the less-natural context of a survey experiment. Indeed, in Panagopoulos et al.’s (2016) replication
                                                                                                                                    study done in the field, the effect sizes fell to about five percentage points.
                                                                                                                                        In addition to product markets, partisanship can distort labor markets. Using an audit design,
                                                                                                                                    Gift & Gift (2015) mailed out resumes signaling job applicants’ partisan affiliation in a heavily
                                                                                                                                    Democratic area and a heavily Republican area. They find that in the Democratic county,
                                                                                                                                    Democratic resumes were 2.4 percentage points more likely to receive a callback than Republican
                                                                                                                                    resumes; the partisan preference for Republican resumes in the Republican county was 5.6
                                                                                                                                    percentage points. Whereas Gift & Gift (2015) examine employer preferences, McConnell et al.
                                                                                                                                    (2018) examine the other side of the labor market and study how partisanship affects employee
                                                                                                                                    behavior. The researchers hired workers to complete an online editing task and subtly signaled
                                                                                                                                    the partisan identification of the employer. Unlike Gift & Gift (2015), they mainly find evidence
                                                                                                                                    of in-group affinity as opposed to out-group prejudice. The only significant differences occurred
                                                                                                                                    between the copartisan condition and the control group. People exhibited a willingness to
                                                                                                                                    accept lower compensation (by 6.5%) from a partisan-congruent employer. At the same time,
                                                                                                                                    they performed lower-quality work and exhibited less effort. Although the mechanism for this
                                                                                                                                    performance deficit is unclear, one possibility is that they perceived the employer to be of higher
                                                                                                                                    quality and therefore less likely to make mistakes.
                                                                                                                                        In addition to affecting economic decisions, partisanship colors how people perceive the state
                                                                                                                                    of the economy. A seminal finding in political behavior research is that people tend to believe that
                                                                                                                                    economic outcomes (e.g., GDP growth, unemployment rate) are more favorable when their party
                                                                                                                                    is in the White House and more unfavorable when it is out (Bartels 2002). These perceptual biases
                                                                                                                                    seem most pronounced when the actual state of the economy is ambiguous (Healy & Malhotra
                                                                                                                                    2013). These findings have recently been challenged on the grounds that survey responses are
                                                                                                                                    expressive cheap talk (Bullock et al. 2015, Prior et al. 2015). The partisan gap in economic

                                                                                                                             138    Iyengar et al.


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                                        ARjats.cls   April 18, 2019    13:39


                                                                                                                            perceptions narrows—but does not disappear—when survey respondents are financially incentivized to provide accurate answers about the state of the economy. Of course, one concern
                                                                                                                            about these findings is that voting, like the typical survey response, is an expressive act, not an
                                                                                                                            incentivized one (see also Berinsky 2018). Moreover, the correlation between vote choice and
                                                                                                                            nonincentivized economic beliefs outstrips the correlation between vote choice and incentivized


                                                                                                                            beliefs, suggesting that paying survey participants to be honest only results in an expensive version
                                                                                                                            of cheap talk.
                                                                                                                                Given the concerns over the motives of survey respondents, scholars have used research designs less subject to partisan cheerleading. For instance, Gerber & Huber (2010) find that when
                                                                                                                            party control of Congress switches, consumer behavior changes, and it changes along party lines,
                                                                                                                            in anticipation of changes in the economy. After the Democrats took over Congress in 2006,
                                                                                                                            strong Democrats showed a 12.8% increase in holiday spending and a 30.5% increase in vacation spending relative to strong Republicans. In an earlier study, Gerber & Huber (2009) used
                                                                                                                            data from county tax receipts to estimate that a county that moves from 50% Democratic to 65%
                                                                                                                            Democratic undergoes an increase in consumption 0.9% higher following a Democratic presidential victory compared with a Republican presidential victory. However, these empirical results
                                                                                                                            have recently been challenged (McGrath 2017), and the relationship between partisanship and
                                                                                                                            economic perceptions remains an important area of scholarly inquiry.
                                                                                                                                Partisanship may spill over into professional decisions as well. In medicine, Hersh &
                                                                                                                            Goldenberg (2016) find that Republican and Democratic physicians give different advice to patients on politicized health issues such as abortion, but not on apolitical health topics. On the
                                                                                                                            patient side, Lerman et al. (2017) leverage longitudinal data and find that Republicans were less
                                                                                                                            likely than Democrats to enroll in health insurance exchanges set up by the Affordable Care Act.
                                                                                                                                While we have focused here on the nonpolitical consequences of affective polarization and
                                                                                                                            partisan animus, there is also the question of political consequences. Interestingly, little has been
                                                                                                                            written on this topic, as most studies have focused on the more surprising apolitical ramifications discussed above. There are two important exceptions, however. First, there is evidence that
                                                                                                                            affective polarization and out-party animus fuel political activity: Individuals’ dislike for the opposing party encourages them to participate more in politics (Iyengar & Krupenkin 2018). Second,
                                                                                                                            Hetherington & Rudolph (2015) show that affective polarization undermines trust on the part of
                                                                                                                            the party that is out of power, and hence makes governing more complex.
                                                                                                                                Research into the consequences of affective polarization is only beginning. More research is
                                                                                                                            needed to understand how these factors play out in different political contexts. For instance, do
                                                                                                                            increases in affective polarization among the mass public increase partisan discord among elites?
                                                                                                                            More generally, does affective polarization threaten to undermine the very mechanisms of electoral accountability through which elected officials can be punished for misdeeds? Were Republicans in Alabama so hostile toward Democratic Senate candidate Doug Jones in 2017 that almost
                                                                                                                            all of them voted for a candidate accused of multiple sexual indiscretions? More research is needed
                                                                                                                            to fully flesh out these behaviors.


                                                                                                                            DECREASING AFFECTIVE POLARIZATION
                                                                                                                            What, if anything, can be done to ameliorate affective polarization? While efforts here are at best
                                                                                                                            nascent, several approaches have shown promise. All of them work to reduce the biases generated
                                                                                                                            by partisanship’s division of the world into an in group and an out group. Hence, some work has
                                                                                                                            focused on making partisan identities less salient or making other identities more salient.
                                                                                                                               First, scholars have shown that correcting misperceptions about party supporters reduces
                                                                                                                            animus toward the other side (Ahler & Sood 2018). The modal member of both parties is a

                                                                                                                                                                        www.annualreviews.org • Affective Polarization in the United States   139


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                           ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019     13:39


                                                                                                                                    middle-aged, white, nonevangelical Christian, but this is not the image most people carry around
                                                                                                                                    in their heads when they think about Democrats and Republicans. Instead, most people think in
                                                                                                                                    terms of partisan stereotypes: Democrats are urban minorities and young people, Republicans
                                                                                                                                    are older, wealthy, or evangelical Christians. Consequently, when the typical American is asked
                                                                                                                                    about the composition of the parties, she tends to dramatically overreport the prevalence of


                                                                                                                                    partisan-stereotypical groups. Only about 11% of Democrats belong to a labor union, but in a
                                                                                                                                    large national survey, the average American thought that 39% of Democrats were union members;
                                                                                                                                    44% of Republicans had this perception along with 37% of Democrats. Likewise, while only
                                                                                                                                    2.2% of Republicans earn more than $250,000 per year, the average citizen thought that 38%
                                                                                                                                    of Republicans earned that much. Looking across a range of party-stereotypical groups, Ahler &
                                                                                                                                    Sood (2018) find that respondents overestimate the prevalence of these groups by 342%. These
                                                                                                                                    biases matter because people typically hold negative views toward the other party’s stereotypical
                                                                                                                                    groups (see also Levendusky & Malhotra 2016b).3
                                                                                                                                        If misperceptions about party composition increase partisan animus, it is possible that correcting them could reduce affective polarization. Happily, this is exactly what scholars find. When
                                                                                                                                    Ahler & Sood (2018) correct respondents’ misperceptions, respondents think the other party is
                                                                                                                                    less extreme, and affective polarization decreases (i.e., they like the other party more). In essence,
                                                                                                                                    people dislike the other party in part because they (inaccurately) perceive it to be quite different
                                                                                                                                    from themselves and full of disliked groups. When this error is corrected, and they realize the
                                                                                                                                    partisan out-group is more similar to them than they had realized, animus lessens.4
                                                                                                                                        A second approach tries to shift the salience of respondents’ partisan identities. Normally,
                                                                                                                                    Democrats and Republicans perceive each other as members of a disliked partisan out group.
                                                                                                                                    But they are also members of a common group: Americans. If Democrats and Republicans see
                                                                                                                                    one another as Americans, rather than partisans, they move from out-group members to in-group
                                                                                                                                    ones, and hence group-based partisan animus should fade. Using a set of survey experiments, as
                                                                                                                                    well as a natural experiment stemming from the July Fourth holiday, Levendusky (2018a) shows
                                                                                                                                    that emphasizing American identity reduces animus toward the other party. For example, in his
                                                                                                                                    experimental results, subjects who had had their American identity primed were 25% less likely to
                                                                                                                                    rate the other party at 0 degrees on a feeling thermometer scale, and 35% more likely to rate the
                                                                                                                                    other party at 50 degrees or higher; there are similar effects for ratings of various traits [see similar
                                                                                                                                    results by Carlin & Love (2018) on the killing of Osama bin Laden]. When we bring forward what
                                                                                                                                    unites Democrats and Republicans, rather than emphasizing what divides and differentiates them,
                                                                                                                                    partisan animus subsides.
                                                                                                                                        More generally, the evidence suggests that making partisanship and politics less salient—and
                                                                                                                                    emphasizing other factors—can potentially change behavior as well. Lerman et al. (2017) partnered with an outside organization, Enroll America, to help uninsured individuals obtain health
                                                                                                                                    insurance through the federal marketplace. Individuals who went to Enroll America’s website were
                                                                                                                                    directed either to the government-run website or to a private website. While the website had no
                                                                                                                                    effect on the behavior of Democrats or Independents, it had an enormous effect on Republicans.


                                                                                                                                    3 While Ahler & Sood (2018) do a commendable job of reviewing the consequences of such misperceptions,

                                                                                                                                    they have less to say about their causes. They offer some initial evidence that those who consume more political
                                                                                                                                    news hold more biased beliefs (see their figure 2), suggesting a role for media coverage of the parties. More
                                                                                                                                    careful documentation of the sources of these stereotypes will be an important step for future research.
                                                                                                                                    4 Similarly, Ahler (2014) shows that when people are explicitly told how ideologically moderate the average

                                                                                                                                    American is, respondents also become more moderate; correcting misperceptions can also mitigate ideological
                                                                                                                                    polarization. However, Levendusky & Malhotra (2016a) reach different conclusions, using a different operationalization of the treatment.


                                                                                                                             140    Iyengar et al.


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                                        ARjats.cls    April 18, 2019    13:39


                                                                                                                            Republicans assigned to the private website were 20 percentage points more likely to enroll in an
                                                                                                                            insurance plan than Republicans assigned to the government website (see their figure 4 and the
                                                                                                                            discussion on p. 764). Likely because of President Obama’s association with the health insurance
                                                                                                                            exchanges, partisan considerations shaped Republicans’ behavior here. But when they were shown
                                                                                                                            a private website—which obscured the government’s role—they became more willing to enroll.


                                                                                                                            In an era of affective polarization, downplaying politics can help to mitigate partisan divisions.
                                                                                                                                Both of these approaches represent important contributions to the literature and highlight
                                                                                                                            important pathways to reducing partisan discord in the mass public. But there are two important limitations. First, while both types of efforts appear to be effective, we should not expect
                                                                                                                            reduction of partisan animus to be easy, even in the survey context, where behavior tends to be
                                                                                                                            quite malleable. While some strategies will work, many sensible strategies will fail. For example,
                                                                                                                            Levendusky (2018b) uses a population-based survey experiment to show that priming partisan
                                                                                                                            ambivalence and using self-affirmation techniques—both of which have been shown to reduce
                                                                                                                            similar biases in other contexts—fail to reduce partisan animus. It may be that in the contemporary political era, when partisanship is chronically accessible, only strong primes are able to reduce
                                                                                                                            affective polarization.
                                                                                                                                Further, it is unclear to what extent treatments that work in a survey experiment (or other
                                                                                                                            controlled settings) work in the messy environment of real-world politics. Even showing that it is
                                                                                                                            possible to reduce affective polarization and discord within the confines of a survey experiment is
                                                                                                                            an important contribution, but another important step for future research will be to demonstrate
                                                                                                                            that such effects can be generalized.
                                                                                                                                One potentially promising strand of research is to build on the insights of intergroup contact theory (Pettigrew & Tropp 2011) and examine whether constructive engagement between
                                                                                                                            Democrats and Republicans could potentially reduce partisan animus. This is also related to a
                                                                                                                            long tradition of work showing that diverse social networks—which expose individuals to different political points of view—foster tolerance for opposing viewpoints, which should also ameliorate affective polarization (Mutz 2002). For example, several groups have fostered small-scale
                                                                                                                            discussions between ordinary Democrats and Republicans to try to bridge the gap between the
                                                                                                                            parties (Nelson 2015). But there have been no systematic evaluations of these efforts, and it seems
                                                                                                                            questionable whether they are scalable.


                                                                                                                            OPEN QUESTIONS AND CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
                                                                                                                            In this closing section, we identify future research agendas and offer some thoughts on the political significance of intensified partisan affect in the current era. First, there has been little to no
                                                                                                                            research identifying the mechanisms underlying affective polarization. On the one hand, distaste
                                                                                                                            for opposing partisans could be couched in raw, reflexive emotion. This could result in extreme
                                                                                                                            political responses based on blind hatred. However, psychologists have long suggested that affect
                                                                                                                            has informational content, so heightened affective polarization may also lead to more considered responses to both in and out groups. For instance, the aversion to economic transactions
                                                                                                                            with opposing partisans may stem not from a visceral emotional response but from a perception
                                                                                                                            that opponents are untrustworthy. This is akin to the distinction in the economics literature between animus and statistical discrimination. Of course, existing research has noted that people’s
                                                                                                                            stereotypes of opposing partisans’ traits are inaccurate (in terms of both means and variances), so
                                                                                                                            distinguishing between these mechanisms seems important.
                                                                                                                                Second, the literature has yet to specify the conditions under which partisans are motivated by
                                                                                                                            either in-group favoritism or out-group animosity. Although social psychologists studying group
                                                                                                                            conflict have generally concluded that in-group affection is the dominant force, the domain of

                                                                                                                                                                         www.annualreviews.org • Affective Polarization in the United States   141


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                           ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019   13:39


                                                                                                                                    politics might be distinctive. There is ample evidence that political judgment is subject to a negativity bias (Soroka 2014), implying that party polarization is driven by out-group hostility. However, there is also evidence that in some situations, partisan bias is prompted more by in-group
                                                                                                                                    love (Lelkes & Westwood 2017). One plausible hypothesis is that the precise mix of in- and outgroup sentiment will depend on individuals’ prior information and how they update beliefs based


                                                                                                                                    on exposure to new information. For instance, in experimental work by McConnell et al. (2018),
                                                                                                                                    consumers exhibited in-group favoritism toward copartisan sellers but not out-group animus toward opposite-party sellers. Perhaps this is because the experimental participants had no prior
                                                                                                                                    relationship with the seller. If people have underlying distrust of unknown sellers, then they can
                                                                                                                                    only update in the positive direction, meaning that we should expect in-group love but not outgroup dislike. On the other hand, when people respond to a more well-known brand with which
                                                                                                                                    they have had a positive, previous relationship, they are able to update negatively but not positively.
                                                                                                                                    Therefore, they may be more likely to exhibit out-group animus in response to partisan information (as in Panagopoulos et al. 2016). It is also possible that the role of in groups and out groups
                                                                                                                                    in decision making is task dependent. Social psychologists have suggested that contextual effects
                                                                                                                                    such as competition and threat alter the degree to which people punish opponents or reward team
                                                                                                                                    members (Brewer 1999). Future research can more explicitly incorporate updating into experimental designs intended to identify the relative contributions of in- and out-group sentiment to
                                                                                                                                    affective polarization.
                                                                                                                                        As a third agenda item, we encourage researchers to explore the role of sorting as a potential
                                                                                                                                    mediator of affective polarization. To the extent that the alignment of ideology and partisanship
                                                                                                                                    exacerbates polarization, sorted partisans should elicit a stronger outpouring of either in-group
                                                                                                                                    favoritism or out-group animus. Yet we know of no work to date that assesses differences in partisans’ affect toward sorted and unsorted copartisans or opponents.
                                                                                                                                        Relatedly, scholars should examine the relative influence of social identities versus ideological sorting on affective polarization. Recent work indicates that while ideological polarization,
                                                                                                                                    sorting, and affective polarization are correlated (Rogowski & Sutherland 2016, Bougher 2017,
                                                                                                                                    Webster & Abramowitz 2017), the relationship is weak, with sorting accounting for only about
                                                                                                                                    5% of the variance in affective polarization (Lelkes 2018, Mason 2018a). Furthermore, over the
                                                                                                                                    past 40 years, affective polarization—as measured by feeling thermometer differences—increased
                                                                                                                                    by about the same amount among those who held the most ideologically consistent issue positions
                                                                                                                                    as among those who held the least ideologically consistent issue positions (Lelkes 2018). Further
                                                                                                                                    complicating any claim that affective polarization is a byproduct of ideological sorting is the possibility that affective polarization may, in turn, increase sorting. The most affectively polarized may
                                                                                                                                    be more likely to toe the party line and adopt party policy positions.
                                                                                                                                        Fourth, no research that we are aware of has identified ways in which affective polarization
                                                                                                                                    drives both elite and mass ideological polarization. Among elites, we suspect that affective polarization increases support for extremist politicians, or, at least, blinds partisans to the ideological
                                                                                                                                    extremity of candidates from their party. For the mass public, we suspect that affective polarization increases partisans’ willingness to conform to their party’s policy positions. Hence, affective
                                                                                                                                    polarization may yield extreme politicians, who then send policy cues to their base, exacerbating
                                                                                                                                    mass ideological polarization.
                                                                                                                                        Finally, there has been little effort to draw out the connections between the American politics literature on affective polarization and similar literatures in comparative politics (though see
                                                                                                                                    Westwood et al. 2017 and Carlin & Love 2018). Comparativists have long recognized the importance of group identity to political behavior and attitudes, even if they have not used the language
                                                                                                                                    of social identity theory or affective polarization. A wide variety of findings in the literatures on
                                                                                                                                    ethnicity and distributive politics, as well as on political violence, provide important theoretical

                                                                                                                             142    Iyengar et al.


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                                          ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019       13:39


                                                                                                                            and empirical insights for the study of affective polarization. While we lack the space to review
                                                                                                                            this literature here, more work is needed to build bridges between Americanists and comparativists
                                                                                                                            interested in these topics.
                                                                                                                                In conclusion, we note that increasing affective polarization can have grave ramifications, especially during times of political turmoil. There is a broad similarity between the current state of


                                                                                                                            the Trump administration and the Watergate years, and yet, heightened polarization has altered
                                                                                                                            the political context in important ways. The Watergate scandal was brought to light by investigative news reports that, over time, became widely accepted as credible and eventually resulted in
                                                                                                                            significant erosion of approval of President Nixon among both Democrats and Republicans alike
                                                                                                                            (Lebo & Cassino 2007). In contrast, the current pervasive drip of scandal touching on the Trump
                                                                                                                            administration has done little to weaken President Trump’s popularity among Republicans, who
                                                                                                                            accuse the press and investigative bodies of partisan bias (although see Montagnes et al. 2018).
                                                                                                                            Partisanship appears to now compromise the norms and standards we apply to our elected representatives, and even leads partisans to call into question the legitimacy of election results, both of
                                                                                                                            which threaten the very foundations of representative democracy.


                                                                                                                            DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
                                                                                                                            The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that
                                                                                                                            might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.


                                                                                                                            ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                                                                                                                            We thank Ryan Carlin, Mo Fiorina, Thomas Gift, Seth Green, Eitan Hersh, Greg Huber, Yanna
                                                                                                                            Krupnikov, Lily Mason, Kristin Michelitch, Clayton Nall, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Tim Ryan, Betsy
                                                                                                                            Sinclair, and Natalie Stroud for valuable comments.


                                                                                                                            LITERATURE CITED
                                                                                                                            Abramowitz AI, Saunders K. 2008. Is polarization a myth? J. Politics 70(2):542–55
                                                                                                                            Abramowitz AI, Webster S. 2016. The rise of negative partisanship and the nationalization of U.S. elections
                                                                                                                                  in the 21st century. Electoral Stud. 41:12–22
                                                                                                                            Ahler DJ. 2014. Self-fulfilling misperceptions of public polarization. J. Politics 76(3):607–20
                                                                                                                            Ahler DJ, Sood G. 2018. The parties in our heads: misperceptions about party composition and their consequences. J. Politics 80(3):964–81
                                                                                                                            Arceneaux K, Johnson M. 2013. Changing Minds or Changing Channels? Partisan News in an Age of Choice.
                                                                                                                                  Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
                                                                                                                            Bakshy E, Messing S, Adamic LA. 2015. Exposure to ideologically diverse news and opinion on Facebook.
                                                                                                                                  Science 348(6239):1130–32
                                                                                                                            Bartels LM. 2002. Beyond the running tally: partisan bias in political perceptions. Political Behav. 24(2):117–50
                                                                                                                            Berinsky A. 2018. Telling the truth about believing the lies? Evidence for the limited prevalence of expressive
                                                                                                                                  survey responding. J. Politics 80(1):211–24
                                                                                                                            Berry J, Sobieraj S. 2014. The Outrage Industry: Political Opinion Media and the New Incivility. Oxford, UK:
                                                                                                                                  Oxford Univ. Press
                                                                                                                            Billig M, Tajfel H. 1973. Social categorization and similarity in intergroup behavior. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 3(1):27–
                                                                                                                            Bishop B. 2009. The Big Sort: Why the Clustering of Like-Minded America Is Tearing Us Apart. New York:
                                                                                                                                  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt


                                                                                                                                                                               www.annualreviews.org • Affective Polarization in the United States   143


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                           ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019     13:39


                                                                                                                                    Bougher LD. 2017. The correlates of discord: identity, issue alignment, and political hostility in polarized
                                                                                                                                         America. Political Behav. 39(3):731–62
                                                                                                                                    Boxell L, Gentzkow M, Shapiro JM. 2017. Greater internet use is not associated with faster growth in political
                                                                                                                                         polarization among US demographic groups. PNAS 114(40):10612–17
                                                                                                                                    Boysen GA, Vogel DL, Madon S. 2006. A public versus private administration of the Implicit Association Test.
                                                                                                                                         Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 36(6):845–56


                                                                                                                                    Brewer MB. 1991. The social self: on being the same and different at the same time. Personality Soc. Psychol.
                                                                                                                                         Bull. 17(5):475–82
                                                                                                                                    Brewer MB. 1999. The psychology of prejudice: ingroup love and outgroup hate? J. Soc. Issues 55(3):429–44
                                                                                                                                    Bullock JG, Gerber AS, Hill SJ, Huber GA. 2015. Partisan bias in factual beliefs about politics. Q. J. Political
                                                                                                                                         Sci. 10(4):519–78
                                                                                                                                    Carlin RE, Love GJ. 2013. The politics of interpersonal trust and reciprocity: an experimental approach.
                                                                                                                                         Political Behav. 35(1):43–63
                                                                                                                                    Carlin RE, Love GJ. 2018. Political competition, partisanship, and interpersonal trust in electoral democracies.
                                                                                                                                         Br. J. Political Sci. 48(1):115–39
                                                                                                                                    Chen MK, Rohla R. 2018. The effect of partisanship and political advertising on close family ties. Science
                                                                                                                                         360(6392):1020–24. http://science.sciencemag.org/content/360/6392/1020
                                                                                                                                    Chopik WJ, Motyl M. 2016. Ideological fit enhances interpersonal orientations. Soc. Psychol. Personality Sci.
                                                                                                                                         7(8):759–68
                                                                                                                                    Druckman JN, Levendusky MS, McLain A. 2018. No need to watch: how the effects of partisan media can
                                                                                                                                         spread via interpersonal discussions. Am. J. Political Sci. 62(1):99–112
                                                                                                                                    Fiorina M, Abrams S, Pope J. 2005. Culture War? The Myth of a Polarized America. New York: Pearson-Longman
                                                                                                                                    Fiorina M, Abrams S, Pope J. 2008. Polarization in the American public: misconceptions and misreadings.
                                                                                                                                         J. Politics 70(2):556–60
                                                                                                                                    Gaertner S, Dovidio J, Anastasio P, Bachman B, Rust M. 1993. The common ingroup identity model: recategorization and the reduction of intergroup bias. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol. 4(1):1–26
                                                                                                                                    Garrett RK, Gvirsman SD, Johnson BK, Tsfati Y, Neo R, Dal A. 2014. Implications of pro- and counterattitudinal information exposure for affective polarization. Hum. Commun. Res. 40(3):309–32
                                                                                                                                    Gentzkow M, Shapiro JM. 2011. Ideological segregation online and offline. Q. J. Econ. 126(4):1799–839
                                                                                                                                    Gerber AS, Huber GA. 2009. Partisanship and economic behavior: Do partisan differences in economic forecasts predict real economic behavior? Am. Political Sci. Rev. 103(3):407–26
                                                                                                                                    Gerber AS, Huber GA. 2010. Partisanship, political control, and economic assessments. Am. J. Political Sci.
                                                                                                                                         54(1):153–73
                                                                                                                                    Gift K, Gift T. 2015. Does politics influence hiring? Evidence from a randomized experiment. Political Behav.
                                                                                                                                         37(3):653–75
                                                                                                                                    Gimpel JG, Hui IS. 2015. Seeking politically compatible neighbors? The role of neighborhood partisan composition in residential sorting. Political Geogr. 48:130–42
                                                                                                                                    Green D, Palmquist B, Schickler E. 2002. Partisan Hearts and Minds: Political Parties and the Social Identities of
                                                                                                                                         Voters. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press
                                                                                                                                    Healy A, Malhotra N. 2013. Retrospective voting reconsidered. Annu. Rev. Political Sci. 16:285–306
                                                                                                                                    Hersh ED. 2016. What the Yankees-Red Sox rivalry can teach us about political polarization. FiveThirtyEight.
                                                                                                                                         https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-the-yankees-red-sox-rivalry-can-teach-us-aboutpolitical-polarization/
                                                                                                                                    Hersh ED, Ghitza Y. 2019. Mixed-partisan households and electoral participation in the United States. PLOS
                                                                                                                                         ONE 13:e0203997
                                                                                                                                    Hersh ED, Goldenberg MN. 2016. Democratic and Republican physicians provide different care on politicized health issues. PNAS 114(42):11811–16
                                                                                                                                    Hetherington M, Rudolph T. 2015. Why Washington Won’t Work: Polarization, Political Trust, and the Governing
                                                                                                                                         Crisis. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
                                                                                                                                    Hogg MA. 2001. A social identity theory of leadership. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 5(3):184–200
                                                                                                                                    Huber GA, Malhotra N. 2017. Political homophily in social relationships: evidence from online dating behavior. J. Politics 79(1):269–83


                                                                                                                             144    Iyengar et al.


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                                         ARjats.cls      April 18, 2019     13:39


                                                                                                                            Huddy L, Mason L, Aarøe L. 2015. Expressive partisanship: campaign involvement, political emotion, and
                                                                                                                                 partisan identity. Am. Political Sci. Rev. 109(1):1–17
                                                                                                                            Iyengar S, Konitzer T, Tedin K. 2018. The home as a political fortress: family agreement in an era of polarization. J. Politics 80(4):1326–38
                                                                                                                            Iyengar S, Krupenkin M. 2018. The strengthening of partisan affect. Adv. Political Psychol. 39(S1):201–18
                                                                                                                            Iyengar S, Sood G, Lelkes Y. 2012. Affect, not ideology: a social identity perspective on polarization. Public


                                                                                                                                 Opin. Q. 76(3):405–31
                                                                                                                            Iyengar S, Westwood SJ. 2015. Fear and loathing across party lines: new evidence on group polarization. Am.
                                                                                                                                 J. Political Sci. 59(3):690–707
                                                                                                                            Kiefer E. 2017. ’Til Trump do us part: the relationship deal breaker we never saw coming. Aug. 1, Refinery29.
                                                                                                                                 https://www.refinery29.com/2017/07/162856/talking-politics-with-partner-relationship-advice
                                                                                                                            Klar S, Krupnikov Y, Ryan JB. 2018. Affective polarization or partisan disdain? Untangling a dislike for the
                                                                                                                                 opposing party from a dislike of partisanship. Public Opin. Q. 82(2):379–90
                                                                                                                            Klinkner P. 2004. Red and blue scare: the continuing diversity of the American electoral landscape. Forum 2(2).
                                                                                                                                 https://doi.org/10.2202/1540-8884.1035
                                                                                                                            Klofstad C, McDermott R, Hatemi P. 2013. The dating preferences of liberals and conservatives. Political
                                                                                                                                 Behav. 35(3):519–38
                                                                                                                            Lebo M, Cassino D. 2007. The aggregated consequences of motivated reasoning and the dynamics of partisan
                                                                                                                                 presidential approval. Political Psychol. 28(6):719–46
                                                                                                                            Lee F. 2016. Insecure Majorities: Congress and the Perpetual Campaign. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
                                                                                                                            Lelkes Y. 2018. Affective polarization and ideological sorting: a reciprocal, albeit weak, relationship. Forum.
                                                                                                                                 16(1): https://doi.org/10.1515/for-2018-0005
                                                                                                                            Lelkes Y, Sood G, Iyengar S. 2017. The hostile audience: the effect of access to broadband internet on partisan
                                                                                                                                 affect. Am. J. Political Sci. 61(1):5–20
                                                                                                                            Lelkes Y, Westwood SJ. 2017. The limits of partisan prejudice. J. Politics 79(2):485–501
                                                                                                                            Lerman A, Sadin M, Trachtman S. 2017. Policy uptake as political behavior: evidence from the Affordable
                                                                                                                                 Care Act. Am. Political Sci. Rev. 111(4):755–70
                                                                                                                            Levendusky MS. 2009. The Partisan Sort: How Liberals Became Democrats and Conservatives Became Republicans.
                                                                                                                                 Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
                                                                                                                            Levendusky MS. 2013. Partisan media exposure and attitudes toward the opposition. Political Commun.
                                                                                                                                 30(4):565–81
                                                                                                                            Levendusky MS. 2018a. Americans, not partisans: Can priming American national identity reduce affective
                                                                                                                                 polarization? J. Politics 80(1):59–70
                                                                                                                            Levendusky MS. 2018b. When efforts to depolarize the electorate fail. Public Opin. Q. 82:583–92
                                                                                                                            Levendusky MS, Malhotra N. 2016a. Does media coverage of partisan polarization affect political attitudes?
                                                                                                                                 Political Commun. 33(2):283–301
                                                                                                                            Levendusky MS, Malhotra N. 2016b. (Mis)perceptions of partisan polarization in the American public. Public
                                                                                                                                 Opin. Q. 80(S1):378–91
                                                                                                                            Lipset SM, Rokkan S. 1967. Party Systems and Voter Alignments: Cross-National Perspectives. Toronto: Free Press
                                                                                                                            Maccoby EE, Maccoby N. 1954. The interview: a tool of social science. Handb. Soc. Psychol. 1:449–87
                                                                                                                            Mason L. 2015. I disrespectfully agree: the differential effects of partisan sorting on social and issue polarization. Am. J. Political Sci. 59(1):128–45
                                                                                                                            Mason L. 2018a. Ideologues without issues: the polarizing consequences of ideological identities. Public Opin.
                                                                                                                                 Q. 82(S1):280–301
                                                                                                                            Mason L. 2018b. Uncivil Agreement: How Politics Became Our Identity. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
                                                                                                                            McCarty N, Poole K, Rosenthal H. 2006. Polarized America: The Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches.
                                                                                                                                 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
                                                                                                                            McConnell C, Malhotra N, Margalit Y, Levendusky M. 2018. The economic consequences of partisanship in
                                                                                                                                 a polarized era. Am. J. Political Sci. 62(1):5–18
                                                                                                                            McGrath MC. 2017. Economic behavior and the partisan perceptual screen. Q. J. Political Sci. 11(4):363–83
                                                                                                                            Michelitch K. 2015. Does electoral competition exacerbate interethnic or interpartisan economic discrimination? Evidence from a market price bargaining experiment in Ghana. Am. Political Sci. Rev. 109(1):43–61


                                                                                                                                                                              www.annualreviews.org • Affective Polarization in the United States   145


PL22CH08_Malhotra                                                                                                           ARjats.cls     April 18, 2019      13:39


                                                                                                                                    Michelitch K, Utych S. 2018. Electoral cycle fluctuations in partisanship: global evidence from eight-six countries. J. Politics 80(2):412–27
                                                                                                                                    Montagnes BP, Peskowitz Z, McCrain J. 2018. Bounding partisan approval rates under endogenous partisanship: why high presidential partisan approval may not be what it seems. J. Politics 81(1):327–33
                                                                                                                                    Mummolo J, Nall C. 2017. Why partisans do not sort: the constraints on political segregation. J. Politics
                                                                                                                                          79(1):45–59


                                                                                                                                    Mutz DC. 2002. Cross-cutting social networks: testing democratic theory in practice. Am. Political Sci. Rev.
                                                                                                                                          96(1):111–26
                                                                                                                                    Nelson R. 2015. The war on partisanship: how fighting polarization became its own cause. National Journal,
                                                                                                                                          Oct. 30. https://www.nationaljournal.com/s/91684/war-partisanship?mref=home
                                                                                                                                    Nicholson SP, Coe CM, Emory J, Song AV. 2016. The politics of beauty: the effects of partisan bias on physical
                                                                                                                                          attractiveness. Political Behav. 38(4):883–98
                                                                                                                                    Panagopoulos C, Green DP, Krasno J, Schwam-Baird M, Moore E, Endres K. 2016. Risky business: Does corporate political giving affect consumer behavior? Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American
                                                                                                                                          Political Science Association, Philadelphia, PA, Sept. 1–4
                                                                                                                                    Perez-Truglia R, Cruces G. 2017. Partisan interactions: evidence from a field experiment in the United States.
                                                                                                                                          J. Political Econ. 125(4):1208–43
                                                                                                                                    Pettigrew T, Tropp L. 2011. When Groups Meet: The Dynamics of Intergroup Contact. New York: Psychol. Press
                                                                                                                                    Pew Research Center. 2017. The partisan divide on political values grows even wider. Tech. Rep., Pew Res. Cent.,
                                                                                                                                          Washington, DC. http://pewrsr.ch/2z0qBnt
                                                                                                                                    Prior M, Sood G, Khanna K. 2015. You cannot be serious: the impact of accuracy incentives on partisan bias
                                                                                                                                          in reports of economic perceptions. Q. J. Political Sci. 10(4):489–518
                                                                                                                                    Puglisi R, Snyder JM. 2011. Newspaper coverage of political scandals. J. Politics 73(3):931–50
                                                                                                                                    Roccas S, Brewer MB. 2002. Social identity complexity. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 6(2):88–106
                                                                                                                                    Rogowski JC, Sutherland JL. 2016. How ideology fuels affective polarization. Political Behav. 38(2):485–508
                                                                                                                                    Ryan TJ. 2017. How do indifferent voters decide? The political importance of implicit attitudes. Am. J. Political
                                                                                                                                          Sci. 61(4):892–907
                                                                                                                                    Sears D. 1975. Political socialization. In Handbook of Political Science, Vol. 2, ed. F Greenstein, N Polsby,
                                                                                                                                          pp. 93–154. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
                                                                                                                                    Sood G, Iyengar S. 2016. Coming to dislike your opponents: the polarizing impact of political campaigns. Work. Pap.,
                                                                                                                                          Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA. https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=2840225
                                                                                                                                    Soroka S. 2014. Negativity in Democratic Politics: Causes and Consequences. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
                                                                                                                                    Stoker L. 1995. Life-cycle transitions and political participation: the case of marriage. Am. Political Sci. Rev.
                                                                                                                                          89(2):421–33
                                                                                                                                    Stroud NJ. 2010. Polarization and partisan selective exposure. J. Commun. 60(3):556–76
                                                                                                                                    Stroud NJ. 2011. Niche News: The Politics of News Choice. New York: Oxford Univ. Press on Demand
                                                                                                                                    Tajfel H. 1978. Differentiation Between Social Groups: Studies in the Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations.
                                                                                                                                          London: Academic
                                                                                                                                    Tajfel H, Turner J. 1979. An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In The Social Psychology of Intergroup
                                                                                                                                          Relations, ed. WG Austin, S Worchel, pp. 33–47. Monterey, CA: Brooks Cole
                                                                                                                                    Theodoridis AG. 2017. Me, myself, and (I), (D), or (R)? Partisanship and political cognition through the lens
                                                                                                                                          of implicit identity. J. Politics 79(4):1253–67
                                                                                                                                    Webster SW, Abramowitz AI. 2017. The ideological foundations of affective polarization in the U.S. electorate. Am. Politics Res. 45(4):621–47
                                                                                                                                    Weisberg HF, Rusk JG. 1970. Dimensions of candidate evaluation. Am. Political Sci. Rev. 64(4):1167–85
                                                                                                                                    Westwood SJ, Iyengar S, Walgrave S, Leonisio R, Miller L, Strijbis O. 2017. The tie that divides: cross-national
                                                                                                                                          evidence of the primacy of partyism. Eur. J. Political Res. 57(2):333–54


                                                                                                                             146    Iyengar et al.