https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123414000234 Published online by Cambridge University Press


                        T R A N S N AT I O N A L E N V I R O N M E N TA L L A W


                                                                          TEL is dedicated to the development
                                                                          of new ideas on law’s contribution
                                                                          to environmental governance in a
                                                                          global context. It approaches legal
                                                                          and regulatory developments with
                                                                          an interest in the contribution of
                                                                          nonstate actors and an awareness
                                                                          of the multi-level governance
                                                                          context in which contemporary
                                                                          environmental law unfolds.


                              TEL warmly invites new work on topics within the scope
                               of the journal from scholars, lawyers and professionals
                           active in ﬁelds related to environmental law and governance.

                                                 @
                                                 @TELjournal                      fa
                                                                                  facebook.com/TELjournal


                    Further information can be found on the TEL homepage:

                    journals.cambridge.org/tel


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123414000234 Published online by Cambridge University Press


                     Notes for Contributors

                     All manuscripts should be submitted via our online system, Editorial Manager, at: http://bjpols.edmgr.com

                     Submission of an article in the first instance is taken to imply that it has not been previously published
                     and is not being considered for publication elsewhere. Authors of articles published in the Journal assign
                     copyright to Cambridge University Press (with certain rights reserved) and you will receive a copyright
                     assignment form for signature on acceptance of your paper. Authors are responsible for obtaining
                     permission to reproduce any material in which they do not own copyright, to be used in both print and
                     electronic media, and for ensuring that the appropriate acknowledgements are included in their manuscript.

                     Submissions should be anonymized, though one version may contain names for editorial use. It is the
                     responsibility of authors to ensure that the anonymization is effective.

                     Authors will be required to submit any article that has been accepted for publication in a format that can
                     be processed by the publisher. The publisher reserves the right to typeset material by conventional means.

                     Where statistical analysis of data has been conducted, contributors should deposit a replication dataset
                     online or with a major public data archive.

                     Anyone who is preparing a manuscript for submission to the Journal is urged to follow the Journal’s style
                     sheet, which covers a number of detailed points concerning footnotes, punctuation, spelling, etc. Though
                     initial submissions need not conform to Journal style, the final copy for publication will be expected to do so.
                     See Style Sheet for Authors available on-line or from the Editors.

                     Articles submitted to the Journal should in general be between 5,000 and 12,000 words (or equivalent in
                     tables and figures) in length. An abstract not exceeding 120 words is required.

                     The Journal seeks to carry Review Articles, which are intended to be substantial intellectual contributions
                     in their own right. Review Articles are the same length as articles, refereed, and must be submitted via
                     Editorial Manager. Questions about Review Articles should be submitted to the managing editor.

                     Notes and Comments are welcome. A Note should contain a body of original information, a new method
                     for doing something or a new idea (speculation, argument, proof, etc.) presented in a brief and unadorned
                     form without inessential commentary. Comments containing criticisms of articles published in the Journal
                     and additional thoughts on them will be considered for early publication, especially if they are short – say,
                     under 1,000 words.

                     First proofs may be read and corrected by contributors provided that they can give the Editors an address
                     through which they can be reached without delay and can guarantee to return the corrected proofs, by
                     air mail where appropriate, within ten days of receiving them. The master proof is held by the Editors;
                     contributors will receive duplicates.


                     COPYING
                     This journal is registered with the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, Mass.
                     01923, USA. Organizations in the USA which are also registered with the C.C.C. may therefore copy
                     material (beyond the limits permitted by sections 107 and 108 of US copyright law) subject to payment
                     to C.C.C. of the per copy fee of $12.00. This consent does not extend to multiple copying for promotional
                     or commercial purposes Code 0007-1234/2014 $12.00.
                     Organizations authorized by the Copyright Licensing Agency may also copy material subject to the usual
                     conditions.

                     ABSTRACTING AND INDEXING
                     The journal is listed in the major relevant abstracting and indexing services worldwide, including
                     ABC Political Science, Automated Subject Citation Alert, America History and Life, Applied Social
                     Science Index and Abstracts, Current Contents, Historical Abstracts, International Political Science
                     Abstracts, Sage Public Administration Abstracts, Social Sciences Index, Studies on Women Abstracts.


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123414000234 Published online by Cambridge University Press


          VOLUME 44 | PART 3 | JULY 2014


          FEATURED ARTICLE
          477 Gráinne De Búrca, Robert O. Keohane and Charles Sabel
              Global Experimentalist Governance

          ARTICLES
          487 Wolfgang Rüdig and Georgios Karyotis
              Who Protests in Greece? Mass Opposition to Austerity
          515 José Antonio Cheibub, Zachary Elkins and Tom Ginsburg
              Beyond Presidentialism and Parliamentarism
          545 Sung Eun Kim and Johannes Urpelainen
              Technology Competition and International Co-operation: Friends or Foes?
          575 Michael Albertus and Victor Menaldo
              Gaming Democracy: Elite Dominance during Transition and the Prospects for
              Redistribution
          605 David Cingranelli, Paola Fajardo-Heyward and Mikhail Filippov
              Principals, Agents and Human Rights
          631 Thomas Pepinsky
              The Institutional Turn in Comparative Authoritarianism
          655 Nathan M. Jensen, Edmund Malesky and Stephen Weymouth
              Unbundling the Relationship between Authoritarian Legislatures and
              Political Risk
          685 Reed M. Wood and Jacob D. Kathman
              Too Much of a Bad Thing? Civilian Victimization and Bargaining in Civil War


          Cambridge Journals Online
          For further information about this journal
          please go to the journal web site at:
          journals.cambridge.org/jps
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123414000234 Published online by Cambridge University Press