759576
research-article2018
                       ABSXXX10.1177/0002764218759576American Behavioral ScientistMcCoy et al.


                                          Article
                                                                                                                        American Behavioral Scientist
                                                                                                                                2018, Vol. 62(1) 16­–42
                                          Polarization and the Global                                                       © 2018 SAGE Publications
                                                                                                                             Reprints and permissions:
                                          Crisis of Democracy:                                                 sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
                                                                                                                  DOI: 10.1177/0002764218759576
                                                                                                               https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764218759576
                                          Common Patterns, Dynamics,                                                  journals.sagepub.com/home/abs

                                          and Pernicious Consequences
                                          for Democratic Polities


                                          Jennifer McCoy1, Tahmina Rahman1, and Murat Somer2


                                          Abstract
                                          This article argues that a common pattern and set of dynamics characterizes
                                          severe political and societal polarization in different contexts around the world,
                                          with pernicious consequences for democracy. Moving beyond the conventional
                                          conceptualization of polarization as ideological distance between political parties
                                          and candidates, we offer a conceptualization of polarization highlighting its inherently
                                          relational nature and its instrumental political use. Polarization is a process whereby
                                          the normal multiplicity of differences in a society increasingly align along a single
                                          dimension and people increasingly perceive and describe politics and society in terms
                                          of “Us” versus “Them.” The politics and discourse of opposition and the social–
                                          psychological intergroup conflict dynamics produced by this alignment are a main
                                          source of the risks polarization generates for democracy, although we recognize
                                          that it can also produce opportunities for democracy. We argue that contemporary
                                          examples of polarization follow a frequent pattern whereby polarization is activated
                                          when major groups in society mobilize politically to achieve fundamental changes in
                                          structures, institutions, and power relations. Hence, newly constructed cleavages
                                          are appearing that underlie polarization and are not easily measured with the
                                          conventional Left–Right ideological scale. We identify three possible negative
                                          outcomes for democracy—“gridlock and careening,” “democratic erosion or collapse
                                          under new elites and dominant groups,” and “democratic erosion or collapse with
                                          old elites and dominant groups,” and one possible positive outcome—“reformed
                                          democracy.” Drawing on literature in psychology and political science, the article

                                          1Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA
                                          2Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey


                                          Corresponding Author:
                                          Jennifer McCoy, Georgia State University, 38 Peachtree Center Avenue SE, Atlanta, GA 30303-2514,
                                          USA.
                                          Email: jmccoy@gsu.edu


McCoy et al.                                                                          17

posits a set of causal mechanisms linking polarization to harm to democracy and
illustrates the common patterns and pernicious consequences for democracy in
four country cases: varying warning signs of democratic erosion in Hungary and the
United States, and growing authoritarianism in Turkey and Venezuela.

Keywords
polarization, democratic erosion, democracy, authoritarianism, populism


Introduction and Overview
Polarized societies make democracies vulnerable. Stark examples of the negative
consequences of severe polarization for governability and democracy abound around
the world today: from the growing concentration of power and democratic erosions
in Turkey, Venezuela, Poland, and Hungary; to paralysis and gridlock followed by
the election of an inexperienced populist in the United States; to careening and collapse of democracy in Thailand and Egypt. The surprises reflected in the victory of
the Brexit vote, the defeat of the peace referendum in Colombia, and the strength of
populist candidates in recent elections in France and Austria also reflect polarized
societies.
   Political polarization benefits democracy by mobilizing political participation, simplifying political choice for voters, and strengthening political parties. Yet in today’s
world, severe polarization threatens both governability and social cohesion, and in
turn, support for democracy in advanced and developing democracies alike. Compared
with the 20th-century Cold War, where the main fault lines were based in the Left–
Right ideological spectrum, the issues dividing people today are more variable and
less easily captured by conventional distinctions.
   Much of the literature on polarization focuses on single case studies (largely the
United States), regional analyses, or specific thematic aspects such as political party
system polarization, ethnic/linguistic fragmentation, or social polarization and income
stratification.1 We argue, however, that common patterns of political mobilization in
severely polarized countries produce similar intergroup conflict dynamics across very
different contexts. We seek to identify and explain these patterns in order to better
understand their consequences for democracy. In a separate project, we identify the
conditions that are likely to produce the different regime outcomes from severe polarization we identify here.2
   The following sections of the article present our theoretical argument about the
common characteristics and dynamics of severe political and societal polarization,
followed by an unpacking of the causal mechanisms linking such polarization to harm
to democracies. We conclude with brief illustrations of the common patterns and pernicious consequences for democracy in four country cases: varying warning signs of
democratic erosion in Hungary and the United States, and growing authoritarianism in
Turkey and Venezuela.


18                                                     American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

Theoretical Argument: The Pattern and Dynamics of
Severe Polarization
Democracy is intended to be a system of governance to manage competing interests in
a society in a peaceful way, following agreed-upon rules of contingent consent
(Przeworski, 1986). Democratic politics also provide opportunities for newly emerging or previously excluded, in an objective and/or subjective sense, segments of the
population to strive for and reach political power. Today, however, many democracies,
old and new, are straining to include these new groups without succumbing to a pernicious pattern of political and societal polarization.
    Some level of political polarization is theorized to be beneficial to a democracy in
terms of providing voting heuristics or clues to help voters choose among candidates,
mobilizing supporters, strengthening political parties, and providing programmatic
choices (Campbell, 2016; Carlin, Singer, & Zechmeister, 2015; Enyedi, 2006, 2008;
LeBas, 2011, 2018). Polarization is also conceived of as a neutral concept encompassing and measuring the natural differences and different expectations from democratic
institutions and processes within any democracy (Katsambekis & Stavrakakis, 2013;
Slater, 2016).
    We are concerned, however, with the polarization that occurs when these differences become aligned within (normally two) camps with mutually exclusive identities
and interests (Lozada, 2014; Somer, 2001, 2016a). It is the alignment of opinions
under a single identity, rather than the radicalization of opinion, that “crystalizes interests into opposite factions” and threatens to undermine social cohesion and political
stability (Baldassari & Gelman, 2008).
    Hence, contemporary polarizations often start when a previously disunited or marginalized segment of society becomes politically united and mobilized to achieve
social, economic, cultural–ideological, or institutional goals. This typically happens
when political entrepreneurs effectively highlight and activate underlying cleavages in
a society, bringing to the fore, constructing or reinventing a dominant cleavage around
which other cleavages align. Purposefully or not, polarizing rhetoric and political tactics in this process become instrumental to uniting and strengthening these groups and
either disarming their opponents, or producing a backlash in an opposition countermobilization. Thus, we maintain that the constitutive trait of severe polarization is its
inherently relational and political nature: it suppresses “within-group” differences and
collapses otherwise multiple and cross-cutting intergroup differences into one single
difference that becomes negatively charged and used to define the “Other.”
    We therefore define polarization as a process whereby the normal multiplicity of
differences in a society increasingly align along a single dimension, cross-cutting differences become instead reinforcing, and people increasingly perceive and describe
politics and society in terms of “Us” versus “Them.” The pernicious consequences of
severe polarization follow from these features as they make compromise, consensus,
interaction, and tolerance increasingly costly and tenuous for individuals and political
actors across the opposite sides of the polarization. Electorates lose confidence in public institutions and normative support for democracy may decline.


McCoy et al.                                                                            19

    At the extreme, each camp questions the moral legitimacy of the others, viewing
the opposing camp and its policies as an existential threat to their way of life or the
nation as a whole (Garcia-Guadilla, 2016; Pew Research, 2016; Schmitt, 1996). They
come to perceive the “Other” in such negative terms that a normal political adversary
with whom to engage in a competition for power is transformed into an enemy to be
vanquished. Categorization extends to all aspects of life, not just political, and peaceful coexistence is no longer perceived by citizens as possible (Lozada, 2014; McCoy
& Diez, 2011). Strong emotions of antipathy and distrust toward opposing parties,
candidates and social groups make this extreme polarization particularly pernicious.
    Consequently, the severe polarization we examine includes a significant affective
dimension, when distance between groups moves beyond principled issue-based differences to a social identity (Iyengar, Sood, & Lelkes, 2012). As Tajfel (1970) and
Tajfel and Turner (1979) argue, social identity leads group-members to hold positive
sentiment toward in-group members and negative sentiment toward out-group members. The more salient the identity, the stronger the loyalty toward in-group members
and the prejudice and antipathy toward out-group members tend to be (Gaertner,
Dovidio, Anastasio, Bachman, & Rust, 1993).
    Once a polity is severely polarized, very different countries face similar dynamics,
resulting in similar problems. Situations of deep polarization create problems of governance as communication and trust break down and the two camps prove unwilling
and unable to negotiate and compromise. Political gridlock paralyzes government, and
in some cases, results in instability and careening between policy choices if neither
side can prevail in the long run and seeks to overturn the predecessor’s policies at
every chance. Economic and civil initiatives across party or group lines diminish,
generating potential losses of overall investment and growth, public goods provision,
macroeconomic management and growth, and socioeconomic development, while the
likelihood of intergroup hostilities or violence increases (Alesina, Baqir, & Easterly,
1999; Algan & Cahuc, 2013; Rodrik, 1999).
    Alternatively, one camp may become hegemonic and curtail liberties, tend toward
authoritarianism or even establish an autocratic regime. At the societal level, citizens
become divided spatially and socially. They come to believe they can no longer coexist in the same nation. Finally, the backlash and conflict arising from extreme polarization can also lead to democratic collapse if former elites and dominant societal groups,
often allied with military forces, retake control with undemocratic means.
    It is striking that even with very different underlying cleavages and institutional and
economic development, and subsequent variation in the regime outcomes, the dynamics of polarizing mobilization and backlash remain similar. Examples range from transitional Egypt with the election of Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood government and
subsequent ouster by coup; to Second and Third Wave polarized polities under Chávez
in Venezuela, Erdogan in Turkey, Thaksin in Thailand, and Mugabe in Zimbabwe; to
polarized EU member polities such as Hungary and Greece, and the United Kingdom
in the process of Brexit; to the arrival of the first African American to the U.S. presidency, followed by the Trump outsider candidacy championing a resentful White
working class in the United States.


20                                                     American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

Reconceptualizing Polarization as a Relational Process
and Identity-Transforming Group Conflict
Political polarization is conventionally measured in terms of issue positions or attitudes, as the ideological distance between political parties, political elites, or voters in
a society. The classic work of Giovanni Sartori (1976) identified polarized party systems based on ideological distance between political parties, with some situations producing centrifugal extremes and erasing the center that Anthony Downs’ (1957)
centripetal dynamics would predict. Studies of political polarization at the elite level
tend to focus on legislative voting (Hacker & Pierson, 2015; Kaol 2015; Poole &
Rosenthal, 1997) or perceptions of ideological distance between political party positions in the legislature (Abramowitz, 2010, 2015; Brewer & Stonecash, 2015;
Campbell, 2016; Hetherington, 2001; Motyl, 2016), or in party manifestos
(Comparative Manifesto Project, 2017). Other scholars examine political polarization
at the mass level, examining the degree to which voters sort themselves into increasingly homogeneous political parties (Fiorina & Abrams, 2008; Hetherington, 2001;
Niemi, Weisberg, & Kimball, 2001) or move further apart on policy issues or selfplacement on an ideological scale (Abramowitz, 2010; Campbell, 2016).
    We argue, however, that in today’s world, additional important cleavages underlie
contemporary polarization not easily measured with the Left–Right ideological scale:
globalist/cosmopolitan versus nationalist; religious versus secular; urban versus rural;
traditional versus modern cultural values; and participatory versus representative democratic models.3 An increasingly common polarizing rhetoric today is populism’s juxtaposition of the people versus elites. Populist discourse serves to link a series of
unsatisfied demands and forms a collective identity around “the people,” in opposition
to an elite accused of frustrating their interests (Stavrakakis, 2016; Hawkins, Riding,
& Mudde, 2012). The populist’s winning electoral strategy of polarizing the electorate
attributes a Manichean and moral dimension to a presumed divide between nefarious
elites and the virtuous (homogenous) people. It paints conflict among groups in black
and white, good and evil terms. A populist candidate may use any of the aforementioned cleavages to identify the establishment elite in constructing his or her People
versus Elite appeal.
    This protean nature of the formative cleavages underlying polarization across different examples in the world, we would argue, reflects the political and instrumental
roots of polarization. The different socioeconomic, cultural–ideological, historical, or
contemporary cleavages on which polarization thrives in particular cases are of course
important to study and explain. But they do not necessarily change the common patterns and dynamics we observe in widely different social–cultural and historical–institutional contexts.
    When polarization in the political sphere extends into other aspects of social relations, we refer to it as societal polarization.4 Following Lozada (2014) in her description of Venezuelan social polarization, we define societal polarization as processes of
group categorization and polarization in the context of social conflict that extend to
spaces of social coexistence, “such as families, schools, churches, and communities,


McCoy et al.                                                                            21

and that take on the same exclusion, rigidity and confrontation present in the political
struggle” (p. 4). The partisan rivalry affects social life in Hungary as well, where
seemingly nonpolitical associations like groups of bird-watchers or fishing anglers are
embroiled in this unhealthy practice of debasing people with different political opinions (Lengyel & Ilonszki, 2010, p. 165, as cited in Vegetti, in press).
    An even more extreme form of societal polarization extends to geographic sorting.
For example, in the case of Venezuela, political polarization extended into the social
sphere by segregating neighborhoods and social spaces by political identity, literally
dividing the capital city of Caracas. In this artificially “essentialized” struggle, people
are being polarized not only on the psychological plane over political matters, but also
on a spatial–physical plane over social matters (García-Guadilla & Mallen, 2016;
Mallen & García-Guadilla, 2017). In the United States, studies have shown geographic
sorting where liberals and conservatives seek out neighborhoods to live with likeminded ideological positions (Bishop, 2009; Motyl, 2016).
    The tendency to avoid all kinds of social communication and physically cut off
the “Other” from one’s own life is exemplified in Turkey as people belonging to
opposing camps (supporters of opposing political parties) begin to declare that they
would not even consider marrying into each other’s family (Corporate Social
Responsibility Association of Turkey, 2016; Somer, 2016a). As social psychology
tells us, intergroup conflict produces a propensity to view the opposing group as
essentially homogeneous and treat the members of that group according to some
stereotypical notion. This social distance and intolerance hinders social interaction
and blocks channels of communication between antagonistic groups, making depolarization a difficult task. Once the forces of polarization are set in motion, they take
on a life of their own: in terms of social and political incentives, it becomes increasingly more convenient for individuals to go along with polarization, and, if and
when a critical mass is reached, powerful cascade (bandwagon) effects can be activated (Somer, 2001).
    Sharp polarization means lesser social interaction between groups, which means
further polarization. As a result, even the presence of polarization may become a
polarized issue whereby different camps view each other’s claims and perceptions as
ill-intentioned. Hence, a recent study showed that the Turkish elites were polarized
over the question whether there is polarization in the country. Participants of the study
who were “members or supporters of the opposition parties” pointed to empirical evidence and complained about polarization as “the most critical issue for Turkey,” while
pro-ruling party participants denied its existence, some of whom attributed the discussion about polarization to “foreign and media provocation” (Aydın-Düzgit & Balta,
2017, p. 11).
    As García-Guadilla and Mallen (2016) argue, polarization is a process, rather than
a situation. “Polarization requires societies replace pragmatic politics, calculated risks,
rational behavior, tolerance and plurality with a Schmittian-styled existential struggle”
(p. 5). It is this idea of existential struggle between “friends” and “enemies” and the
need to protect one’s way of life from “the enemy” that is at the core of the politics of
extreme polarization (Schmitt, 1996).


22                                                    American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

   Thus, identity, interest, and attitudes become linked in the politics of polarization.
Although polarization manifests itself in the form of a struggle between mutually
exclusive identity-based groups, these identities are often mere vehicles to drive certain conflicting interests forward. The expression of those conflicting interests requires
group-based identity markers5; some of these markers may be long-existing in a society, and some may be novel creations.


Polarization’s Negative Consequences for Democracy:
Causal Mechanisms
We identify below a chain of causal mechanisms to demonstrate how the dynamics of
political polarization as social identity may lead to negative outcomes for democracy,
while also recognizing that these mechanisms may at times occur simultaneously.


Polarizing Discourse and Rise of Affective Polarization
No matter the origins of political polarization—whether a consequence of demographic change and party realignment (Abramowitz, 2010; Campbell 2016), institutional change (Iyengar, 2016) economic or state crises (Handlin, 2017), or deep
grievances and resentment about perceived injustice or inequities that mobilize a
group to demand change (Cramer, 2016; McCoy & Rahman, 2016), we can identify
common dynamics and potential consequences for democratic support and social
cohesion. Whether mass or elite-led, it often begins with a discursive element deepening, or even exploiting, existing social cleavages and/or resentments.
   We have conceptualized a polarizing society as one in which cross-cutting cleavages are flattened and a single boundary begins to divide societies into two camps,
with political identities becoming social identities. Polarizing political entrepreneurs,
especially populists, are adept at exploiting grievances and addressing resentment
using rhetoric identifying someone (rather than something) to blame for a particular
grievance. This rhetoric thus creates an Us versus Them dynamic. As polarization
deepens, the cleavage often becomes one around pro- and anti-incumbent sentiment,
such as the chavistas and anti-chavistas in Venezuela.
   Negative campaigns differentiating one party or candidate from another by attacking the integrity of the opponent are found to increase negative partisanship and
affective polarization (Abramowitz & Webster, 2016; Iyengar et al., 2012). As
Abramowitz and Webster (2016) find in the United States, negative views of the
opposing political camp contribute to “a vicious cycle of mutually reinforcing elite
and mass behavior” (p. 22). Amplifying the delegitimating messages of negative
campaigning, the media play an important role as well. Various studies have identified a number of mechanisms through which media has influenced affective polarization in the electorate, including journalists’ use of polarized exemplars (Levendusky
& Malhotra, 2013), and diversification and proliferation of media sources allowing
the formation of “information bubbles” (Kleinberg & Lau, 2016; Prior, 2007; Duca &
Saving, 2012).


McCoy et al.                                                                            23

Intergroup Conflict Dynamics: Us Versus Them
We argue that an aspect of severe polarization key to understanding its impact on democratic resilience and cohesion is the group identity that models an intergroup conflict
dynamic. Theories of evolutionary biology and psychology explain intragroup cooperation and intergroup competition and conflict in terms of biological and cultural influences (see, e.g., J. Greene, 2013; Sapolsky, 2017). Social psychology theories of
intergroup conflict tell us that members of a group tend to exhibit sympathy and loyalty
to other members of their group, while they tend to exhibit antipathy and prejudice
toward members of the out-group. Theories of social identity reinforce the notion that
partisan social identity contributes to the bipolarity of perceptions favoring members of
the in-party relative to those of the out-party. In turn, people attach with more intensity
to groups they feel the most similar to and when other groups feel very different (S.
Greene, 1999; Iyengar et al., 2012; Lupu, 2015; Tajfel, 1970; Tajfel & Turner, 1979).
    Severely polarized democracies, then, exhibit the tribal nature of intergroup dynamics, in which members become fiercely loyal to their “team,” wanting it to win at all
costs, and strongly biased or prejudiced against the other group (Green, Palmquist, &
Schickler, 2002; Mason, 2015). The psychology of polarization becomes fundamental
as mechanisms of dehumanization, depersonalization, and stereotyping all contribute
to the emotional loathing, fear, and distrust of the out-partisans. As Cristancho and
Firat (2017) note, the affective component underlying group identities and affiliations,
therefore plays a major role in creating and sustaining polarization through shaping
attitudes, behavior, and discursive practices.
    Natural in-group favoritism does not automatically result in the hatred and dehumanization of the out-group (Brewer, 1999; Lozada 2014). When the other is put in a
culturally invisible domain, however, it becomes easier to dehumanize others. Instead
of referring to others as “you,” people begin referring to the out-group as “them.” This
change in language reflects and reinforces the politics of alienation and exclusion in
social arenas. Just as in the political arena, people holding middle ground in the society
also find the ground beneath them shrinking quickly. Whether one supports a particular camp or not, in a highly polarized society, individuals are forced to choose a side
or be labeled by others as belonging to one side or the other (McCoy & Diez, 2011).
    Political elites can intentionally and unintentionally intensify the consequences of
these psychological mechanisms. Polarization as a discourse-driven process exaggerates differences between groups to activate exclusive identity markers and alignments.
The rhetoric and symbols used in the politics of polarization create the sense of an “us”
versus “them” conflict with mutually exclusive identities. Such depiction of the outgroup also instigates the stereotypical idea that these conflicting groups are homogenous in their own make-up, meaning members within each group are similar in terms
of opinion, attitude, and behavior along with other more visible features like race/
ethnicity/religious orientation/economic status, and so on. In cases where polarization
takes a physical–spatial form like that in Venezuela or the United States, such stereotypical notions get a further boost by physical segregation and feeds on the existing
feeling of antagonism.


24                                                             American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

   When people are exposed to “convincing” polarizing thoughts and ideas through
repeated and frequent interactions with like-minded people, they begin to form a
coherent, broad-based, solid, and extreme position that pits one group against the other
(Baldassari & Bearman, 2007). This helps us understand why and how individuals
with extreme opinions can influence the group dynamics. Somer’s (2001) analysis of
ethnic polarization in Yugoslavia using the cascade model describes this process where
private individuals sharing certain opinions can solidify their “divisive image” of the
society coming into close contact with people sharing similar views:

     By the logic of cascade processes, if the social and political significance of the initial
     advocates of an action, belief, or norm reaches a critical level, the balance will tip in favor
     of that action, belief, or norm for a greater number of people, who will change their
     behavior accordingly. Therefore, in the case of ethnic polarization, divisive ethnic
     entrepreneurs constantly try to tip the balance of incentives in favor of holding the
     divisive image and undertaking actions that directly or indirectly promote it . . . If they
     succeed, they trigger a chain reaction of individual responses. People who previously
     were indecisive about or opposed to the behavior in question jump on the generated
     bandwagon along with those who had been advocating it all along. (p. 130)


Effect on Behavior: Collective Action, Geographic and Social Sorting, and
Distancing
Communication and social interaction are at the heart of crystallization of polarizing
opinions, worldviews, and identities. Social interactions, when conducted only within
a seemingly homogenous group, can actually increase the distance between groups
that are at conflict in society. Homophily, or seeking out people with similar traits,
leads people to decrease interaction with the out-group and increase it within the ingroup (Alesina & La Ferrara, 2000; Costa & Kahn, 2003; Letki, 2008).
   In processes of deepening polarization, then, we see greater identification and interaction with in-group members and concomitant distance from the out-group ones
(Esteban & Schneider, 2008; King & Anderson, 1971). Affective political polarization
tends to increase social distance as well (Iyengar et al., 2012). Using Emory Bogardus’
(1925) social distance scale to ask respondents about the acceptability of marriage or
having as neighbor’s members of the opposing or least-liked political party, studies have
found growing social distance among partisans in the United States and Turkey
(Corporate Social Responsibility Association of Turkey, 2016; Pew Research Polarization
Project, 2016). Such social distance in turn impedes the direct and meaningful social
interaction that social contact theory finds should reduce stereotypes and provide greater
positive feelings about out-group members (Pettigrew & Tropp, 2006, 2008).
   We expect that the intergroup conflict dynamics characterizing severe polarization
lead to the perception of zero-sum interests replacing positive-sum interests, impeding
joint collective actions and reinforcing the perception of mutually exclusive identities
in a vicious feedback loop. One causal mechanism that links identities to perceived
interests is collective actions (Somer, 2005). The more people hear in a polarized


McCoy et al.                                                                                       25

political–discursive environment that they have zero-sum interests, where if “they”
win, “we” lose, the less they seek joint collective actions and have shared experiences,
thereby perceiving more group difference and tending to develop “rival” (mutually
exclusive) perceptions of their identities. Alternatively, the flow of causality may flow
from identity to interest.

   People whose dominant discursive-conceptual environment tells them that they are
   mutually exclusive “others” do not seek joint collective actions. The less they undertake
   joint collective actions, the more their perceptions of difference, and the more likely it is
   that they will perceive their interests to be zero-sum. (Somer, 2005, p. 120)


Weakening Democratic Norms and Institutions
We expect that growing social distance and negative partisan affect in turn lead to a
greater questioning of the moral legitimacy of political leaders from the out-group. As
Iyengar et al. (2012) note,

   those who impugn the motives and character of political opponents are less likely to treat
   as legitimate the decisions and policies enacted when the opponents control government,
   and may also be less satisfied with institutions that respond to popular will. (p. 428)

Attaching moral convictions to issues or leaders can lead to resistance to compromise
and disdain for those who do (Kreps, Laurin, & Merritt, 2017; Ryan, 2017); perceived
illegitimacy of political systems and leaders when they fail to deliver moralized ends
(Skitka, 2002; Skitka, Bauman, & Lytle, 2009); and the abandonment of due process
and the rule of law as any means are justified to pursue a moralized end (Skitka, 2002;
Skitka & Houston, 2001).
    The consequences for democratic stability and cohesion are profound: Increased
zero-sum perceptions and reduced willingness to cooperate and compromise in seeking solutions to shared problems produce problems of governance: either gridlock—
the inability to make and implement effective policy decisions or the unilateral
imposition of policies by the majority on the minority. Either outcome is likely to
reduce public confidence in democratic institutions.
    In the extreme, perceptions of the out-party as a threat to the nation or way of life if they
were to come to power or stay in power lead to violation of democratic norms. Government
supporters grow increasingly tolerant of illiberal actions to tamp down dissent and of extraconstitutional (or at times anti-constitutional) measures to extend an incumbent’s term in
power. Oppositionists contemplate extra-constitutional (or at times anti-constitutional)
measures to remove the incumbent group from power when they view its actions as threatening and are unable to influence those actions through democratic means.


Causal Chain Linking Polarization to Democratic Erosion
We thus hypothesize the following causal mechanisms linking polarization to harm to
democracies in a cascading effect:


26                                                      American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

     •• A polarizing society, or one that is open to polarization, whether from demographic change and political realignment, state or economic crises, or deep
        grievance and perceived injustice causing resentment, may be politicized by a
        leader or movement to mobilize political action from above or below.
     •• Polarizing political rhetoric centered on Us versus Them aligns group interests
        around one social cleavage, while suppressing and reducing the importance of
        other cross-cutting cleavages.
     •• Rhetorical focus on intergroup competition reinforces resentments and contributes to rising mass negative partisanship (dislike of out-party is greater than like
        of in-party) and affective polarization (sympathy toward in-group and antipathy
        toward the out-group).
     •• Deepening affective polarization, in turn, strengthens tribal tendencies of loyalty to in-group and conflict with out-party, enhances zero-sum perceptions,
        increases social distance, and decreases willingness to cooperate and compromise with the political out-group.
     •• Perceptions of the policies and political project of the “Other” as an existential
        threat to the nation lead both government and opposition groups to consider
        undemocratic actions.
           Government supporters condone democratic norm violations and erosions,
            and tolerate illiberal practices by the incumbent in the interest of keeping
            power and reducing threats.
           Opposition groups are motivated to contest power outside the electoral arena
            if necessary. If they win, it indicates a change of power has occurred outside
            democratic rules (thus, democratic breakdown). If they lose, it facilitates
            greater erosion by the incumbent.

     A simplified graphic representation of the causal chain follows.


Figure 1. Causal Chain from Polarization to Democratic Erosion.


Illustrative Cases: Pernicious Polarization and
Consequences for Democracy
Hungary
Hungary exemplifies a pattern of contemporary polarization where a traditional left–
right divide has been replaced by a more cultural nationalist–cosmopolitan one, constructed by post-communist political parties to fill the ideological void and stabilize
the electorate. In fact, the political party system is one of the least polarized in Europe
on economic and social issues, but one of the most polarized on cultural and symbolic
issues, as perceived by both experts and citizens (Vegetti, 2017; in press). Thus, while


McCoy et al.                                                                              27

the polarization is expressed on a Left–Right ideological scale in public opinion surveys, the content of that divide reflects cleavages over religious–secular and nationalist–cosmopolitan divides, rather than economic or social ones. Right wing parties
in Hungary are staunch supporters of religious principles in politics, favor nationalist
symbols, call for greater governmental control on citizens’ lives, and prioritize order
and stability. In contrast, Left wing parties favor cosmopolitanism, advocate a secular
state, promote individualism, and support civil liberties.
    This level of polarization was not immediately visible following the transition from
Communist era to the democratic one. The first three post-Communist elections (1994,
1998, and 2002) were marked by electoral volatility shifting between Right- and Leftwing coalitions to form a government. The 2002 elections marked a change in political
tone when a Fidesz-led populist campaign reduced the margin of victory for the left/
liberal coalition headed by MSZP, and Fidesz leader Victor Orban made accusations of
electoral fraud. Although the 2006 election brought the same MSZP-led coalition to
power, several events led to rising support for Victor Orban’s increasingly populist message and eventual victory in 2010: a scandal over a leaked tape in which the MSZP
Prime Minister confirmed that he had lied to the nation during the election campaign, a
clash between the ethnic minority Roma and mainstream Hungary, and the financial
crisis of 2008. Fidesz won a landslide victory giving it a two-thirds majority in the parliament and the ability to modify the constitution. Orban consolidated his party’s influence
over the Constitutional Court, the Election Commission, and even the Media Council.
    Polarization in Hungary is largely elite driven. In postcommunist Hungary, economic reform enjoyed widespread consensus and did not differentiate the political
parties. Orban’s populist language and shift to the right in the 2002 election identified
the old Communists as the establishment elite to rail against, but a Cosmopolitan/
National cleavage soon emerged as an electoral mobilization tool. The style of discourse became increasingly antagonistic as the parties adopted Manichean rhetoric to
describe a cosmic struggle between good versus evil and denigrated their opponents.
Institutional incentives underlie the political strategy: the Hungarian electoral system
is a winner-take-all system where defeated political parties have no say in policy formulation (Enyedi, 2016). Therefore, their strategies are based on coalition politics and
divisive rhetoric which shrinks the room for any moderate and alternative opinion
(Tóka & Popa, 2013). Fidesz actually perfected the art by slowly building coalitions
with conservative parties and civil society organizations like the Church. It even created its own “civic circle” that mobilized mass participation through seemingly nonpolitical activities like blood donation. While such strategies might be beneficial in
terms of stabilizing the electorate. and giving the party system more institutional form,
it is also causing democratic erosion and poisoning social relationships.
    The outcomes for democracy exhibit a concentration of power and a growing illiberalism. Fidesz used its majority position after the 2010 elections to modify the constitution, further concentrating the party’s hold on key institutions, such as the election
commission and media council, and increase its supermajority through changing electoral rules and gerrymandering districts to achieve an even more disproportionate
share of representation in the parliament. As shown in Figures 2 and 3, the government’s willingness to compromise, indicated by its respect for counter-arguments of


28                                                                American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)


Figure 2. Respect for counterargument.
Source. Varieties of Democracy dataset (Version 7). On scale of 0 to 5 (0 being the lowest), scores
represent diminishing level of tolerance for opposing views among political elites. 5 = Recognition of
counterarguments and changing one’s one position accordingly; 0 = Counterarguments are not permitted in the
country and people face punishments for voicing opposing opinions.


political opponents and its consultation of other parties and actors, has declined since
Fidesz’ ascent to power in 2010.
   Civil liberties have also come under threat as the Orban government cracked down
on internationally funded NGOs, restricted freedom of the press, and took a hardline
against refugees and immigrants, refusing to adhere to European Union guidelines on
receiving Syrian refugees. As Figure 4 shows, Hungary declined on the Freedom
House 7-point Freedom scale from a 1 (completely free) to a 2 between 2010 and
2015, and another dip to 2.5 in the 2017 Freedom in the World Report. Restrictions on
press freedom were particularly singled out. Meanwhile Hungary’s Democracy score
declined from 2.14 in 2008 to 3.54 in 2017 (on a 7-point scale with 7 the least democratic; Freedom House, 2017). While it would be premature to call it a case of democratic breakdown, Hungary thus illustrates a case of democratic backsliding under new
political elites and dominant groups.

United States
The Southern Democrat political party realignment in the 1970s and 1980s led to
marked political party polarization in the 1990s and 2000s as Americans sorted into
more ideologically homogeneous political parties and Congressional voting exhibited
greater polarization (Campbell, 2016; Pew Research, 2016). Affective polarization


McCoy et al.                                                                                                     29


Figure 3. Consultation with other actors.
Source. Varieties of Democracy (Version 7). On a scale of 0 to 5 with 0 the lowest. 5 = consulting with
a wide range of participants from the entire political spectrum; 0 = authoritative decisions taken without any
consultation.


Figure 4. Democratic Erosion (Freedom scores).
Source. Freedom House, 1 = most free; 7 = least free.


accelerated after Barack Obama was elected in 2008 as the first African American
biracial president, giving voice to an underrepresented minority with a long history of
discrimination.
   Obama’s presidency belied the hope that the United States had entered a postracial political era. Instead, political scientists determined that racial resentment,


30                                                     American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

ethno-nationalism, and racial prejudice played a major role in predicting voting
choice among Whites in the next two presidential elections, costing Obama votes in
his second election and lending votes to Trump in 2016 (Abramowitz, 2016;
Knuckey & Kim, 2015; Morgan & Lee, 2017; Tesler, 2016).
   Obama’s election spurred a counter-mobilization of White, conservative, and evangelical voters in the Tea Party. The early Tea Party movement expressed anger and
resentment at the distributive injustice of welfare programs for “undeserving” immigrants, minorities, and youth, while favoring entitlement programs like Social Security
and Medicare for “hard-working” Americans (Skocpol & Williamson, 2012).
   Six years later, the reaction to the growing racial, ethnic, and gender diversity of the
American electorate produced a surprising win for Donald Trump, whose campaign
rhetoric was starkly polarizing and anti-establishment, dividing the country between
“Us”—the “real” Americans who hungered for a return to an idealized past when
industrial jobs provided for upward mobility and White males were in charge in the
workplace and the family, and “Them”—the immigrants, minorities, and liberal elites
who had wrought an “American carnage” (Inaugural speech, January 21, 2017).
Trump’s victory spawned another grass-roots counter-mobilization, this time on the
Left and in particular women, who marched and ran for political office in massive
numbers.
   The U.S. story reflects the dynamics of severe polarization laid out in this article.
The empowerment of new minority groups in the form of Barack Obama’s election
reinforced a relative sense of loss and disempowerment by White working-class voters
whose economic base was shifting in a globalized economy. Their sense of injury and
injustice was easily exploited by candidate Trump as he employed a populist Manichean
message casting blame on the nefarious Washington elites working against the virtuous people, giving permission to his supporters to express their resentment and anger
even in violent forms.
   Partisan antipathy rose dramatically compared with 1994, when only 21% of
Republicans and 17% of Democrats had highly unfavorable views of the other. By
2016, those figures had risen to 58% and 55%, respectively. Roughly half of voters of
each party say the other party makes them feel afraid, while those who say that the
policies of the other party are so misguided they are a threat to the nation have risen
rapidly. In 2016, 45% of Republicans viewed Democratic policies as a threat, up 8
points in just 2 years; 41% of Democrats viewed Republican policies as a threat, up 10
points in 2 years (Pew Research Center, 2016).
   The growth in negative partisanship may also reflect the sense of threat and zerosum perceptions: large numbers of voters are voting against an opposing candidate
rather than for their candidate, and more voters dislike the other party more than they
like the party they belong to or lean toward (Abramowitz & Webster, 2015; Pew
Research, 2016).
   Polarization’s impact on U.S. democracy has been primarily one of gridlock and
careening as Republicans carried out an explicitly obstructionist strategy against the
Obama administration, and Obama made use of unilateral executive orders to implement policy change. Subsequently, the Trump administration in its first year exhibited


McCoy et al.                                                                         31

an evident bent to undo anything accomplished by Obama. The Republican-led Senate
ended a practice of supermajority voting (filibuster and cloture) for Supreme Court
appointments and attempted to enact major legislation without bipartisan consultation
or support in 2017. Diminished tolerance of opposing views among political elites is
also reflected in the degradation of respect for counter-arguments as indicated in
Figure 2, where the United States fell to a 3 (acknowledge but not value counterarguments) in 2013 and then to a 2 (elites acknowledge the counterarguments only to
degrade them and debase the individuals and groups who make such arguments) in
2016.
   Warning signs of another of our possible outcomes—democratic backsliding,
emerged in the public’s apparent tolerance of illiberal behavior by the new administration and some of its supporters in 2017. Violation of democratic norms in recent years
and especially since the election of Donald Trump include the erosion of partisan
restraint, presidential restraint, and the idea of a legitimate opposition (Levitsky &
Ziblatt, 2016). Trump’s questioning the legitimacy of Obama’s presidency from his
birther movement of 2010, and his behavior in the 2016 campaign and first year in
office—unfounded accusations of voter fraud in his own election, refusal to unambiguously condemn violence, distortion of facts, attacks on mainstream media, and
denigration of scientific evidence and expertise—are all warning signs of antidemocratic behavior. Even strong institutions and constitutional protections are vulnerable
to regression (Huq & Ginsburg, forthcoming) and scholars tracking assessments of
political scientists indicate an increased risk of democratic backsliding (Authoritarian
Warning Survey, 2017).


Turkey
Turkey’s Justice and Development Party (AKP) was an offshoot of earlier Islamist
parties. As a newly founded party, it came to power in 2002 following a financial
crisis that widely discredited mainstream political elites and institutions in the eyes
of the electorate and by promising to be a catch-all party and to revamp Turkey’s
mainstream political–institutional and economic structures in favor of the country’s
underprivileged groups. From the beginning, but increasingly after initial confrontations with pro-secular institutions and opposition, the party used polarizing rhetoric
and identity formation by building on preexisting and at least partially cross-cutting
cleavages. These included divisions and identities such as “religious–secular,” “center–periphery,” “globalist–nationalist” and “rich–poor,” which were historical–institutional legacies of Turkey’s pro-secular and state-led modernization and nation-state
building.
   Polarization helped the party align the perceived interests of diverse groups with
each other and alongside a newly constructed division. While on the surface the new
division seemed to coincide with the amorphous markers of “conservative” versus
“secular,” it evolved into a partisan fault line. Regrouping along this new cleavage,
pro-AKP groups would consolidate into a governing bloc based on an oppositional
identity against those ostensibly defending “the elitist and corrupt old Turkey.” This


32                                                    American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

was a relational process. Opposition groups threatened by the AKP’s rise also used
polarizing rhetoric and strategies of mass mobilization based on causes and principles
such as secularism and constitutionalism but were less effective in overcoming their
internal differences.
    Polarizing discourse that defined the supporters and “foes” of the AKP in terms of
a highly simplified frame (“the challengers and defenders of old Turkey,” respectively)
while defaming the latter helped the party build a highly effective party organization
and secure a loyal support base. In addition, it proved instrumental as a leverage to
dismantle the long-established tutelage of the secularist military over civilian politics.
Hence, polarization can be argued to have contributed to democratization as long as
there remained some balance and sharing of power between the AKP on the one hand
and the opposition parties and pro-secular elites, middle classes, civil society, and
bureaucracy on the other. The AKP became increasingly unwilling to share power,
intolerant of criticism, and bent on authoritarianism; however, as the party used polarizing tactics and creeping authoritarianism to undermine the latter groups and institutional checks and balances, opposition parties failed to reform themselves, and the
power balance changed in favor of the ruling party (Somer, 2014).
    Arguably, polarization spiraled out of control increasingly undermining social relations, emboldening the AKP’s Islamist and nationalist activists and political opportunists, who sidelined more democratic-minded and corruption-resistant actors within the
party, and disabling interparty cooperation. As the Figures 2 and 3 above indicate,
“consultation with other actors” and “respect for counterarguments” have been diminishing since 2010 and 2015, in respective order. Polarization nurtured rigidly loyal
AKP constituencies and new elite supporters who were, in accordance with Svolik’s
(2012) more general argument, ready to tolerate—or, in the case of the elites, implement—the party’s illiberal policies and overlook its involvements in state capture and
corruption. Other pernicious consequences of polarization also became increasingly
clear. Both politics and the society became highly polarized based on pro-government
versus antigovernment partisanship with undertones of secular–religious and urban–
rural cleavages, and, more recently a more personalist division between the supporters
and opponents of President Erdogan (Aydın-Düzgit & Balta, 2017; Corporate Social
Responsibility Association of Turkey, 2016; KONDA, 2017). Public debates even
about seemingly neutral issues such as environment almost automatically turned into
partisan quarrels. As of March, 2017, 34.2% of the AKP voters and 60.4% of the main
opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP) voters declared respectively that they
would “never vote” for the other party (KONDA, 2017).6
    A failed coup attempt in 2016 allegedly staged by previous AKP allies led to the
declaration of an ongoing state of exception, de facto suspension of rule of law and
checks and balances, massive purges and widespread rights abuses, and oppression of
the opposition. Constitutional amendments that narrowly passed in a disputed referendum in 2017 mean that the parliamentary system would be replaced with an executive presidency by 2019. This change may institutionalize the “executive degradation”
of political and civic pluralism based on an authoritarian presidential system
(Diamond, 2015).


McCoy et al.                                                                         33

    Hence, as of this writing, Turkey was in a period of flux suffering from democratic
erosion and increasingly authoritarian rule with new elites and dominant groups,
which may or may not become consolidated. As Figure 4 shows, Freedom House considers it “partially free” with a downward trend since 2012 and a sharp decline since
2016. While some scholars already classify it as “competitive–authoritarian,” others
point out that it may stabilize into different variations of authoritarianism, return to
democracy and reforms, or fluctuate between these outcomes (among others, Esen &
Gümüşçü, 2017; Öktem & Akkoyunlu, 2017; Somer, 2016b). Authoritarianism or
illiberal democracy with return of old elites and dominant groups seem unlikely but
are also possible.
    Similar to the Venezuelan case analyzed below, Erdogan’s AKP emerged from the
periphery of political power and challenged the status quo with the promise of replacing the old elites and bringing full democracy, more accountable government, and
justice for the masses. After 15 years in power and surviving backlashes from the old
elites and their middle-class base, the AKP clearly became the new status quo.
However, rather than the creation of more democratic and inclusive rules of politics,
Turkey has been witnessing in recent years a democratic breakdown coupled with the
development of a less rule-based regime (Esen & Gümüşçü, 2016; Öktem &
Akkoyunlu, 2017; Somer, 2016a). Thereby, the AKP not only has been reproducing
the “old” authoritarian and semi-democratic practices in the name of a new and more
Islamic mainstream identity; it also began to generate new, more mass-based and often
less tolerant methods of authoritarianism (Somer, 2016a). It became more reluctant to
give up power democratically than any previous government of Turkey, and faced
massive and unaccounted for charges of corruption.


Venezuela
In the wake of a turbulent decade in the 1990s, characterized by a twin crisis of representation and of the state (McCoy & Myers, 2004; Handlin, 2018), Venezuelans
elected their president, a charismatic former coup-leader turned radical politician
promising to re-found the 40-year old democracy. Hugo Chavez’s populist message
blaming the corruption and mismanagement of the political elite for stealing the oil
birthright of common Venezuelans mobilized the previously marginalized urban and
rural poor and an increasingly resentful middle class. Chavez’s new political movement, the Bolivarian Revolutionary Movement, initially lacked a legislative majority,
but after pushing through a new constitution and holding new elections in 2000,
Chavez’s party gained a majority.
   Chavez’s polarizing populist rhetoric emphasizing a nefarious elite tied to the
“imperialist” United States exploiting “el pueblo”—the virtuous people, set up an Us
versus Them scenario with moralist overtones. His confrontational policies to remake
democratic institutions in a new “participatory–protagonist” democracy and his economic policies soon produced a backlash from the prior business, political, and civil
society elites. The resulting polarization led to massive marches, the deaths of 43
persons, and a short-lived coup against Chavez in 2002. After defeating a


34                                                    American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

recall referendum to cut short his term in 2004 and an opposition boycott of legislative
elections the next year, Chavez took advantage of the absence of a second political
“pole” to pack the courts, promote loyalists in the military and electoral council, and
weaken independent media. For the next decade, while affective polarization at the
societal level grew between “chavistas” and anti-chavistas,” at the political level, the
opposition fragmented while Chavez and his political movement took control of most
political institutions and dominated in the electoral arena. Over time, Chavez constructed a new polarizing boundary, moving from class-based cleavages and competing views of democracy, to a simple divide of being for or against his so-called
Bolivarian Revolution.
   A new political polarization emerged in 2013 when Chavez died and his successor,
Vice President Nicolas Maduro, only narrowly defeated his opponent in special elections. Oil prices fell in 2014 and finally by 2015, a unified opposition political alliance gained a two-thirds majority in the legislature, setting up a serious institutional
challenge to the governing party. Maduro’s institutional allies in the Supreme Court
and National Electoral Council turned increasingly authoritarian, stripping the legislature of its powers, establishing a new all-powerful constituent assembly through a
dubious electoral process and repressing political protest. Democratic erosion in
terms of loss of separation of powers and curtailment of civil and political rights
increased throughout the period, as shown in Figure 4, to the point that Freedom
House rated Venezuela Not Free for the first time in its 2017 report (5.5 of 7, where
7 is Least Free).
   Maduro’s hardcore supporters seem willing to tolerate the growing illiberalism and
clear transition toward authoritarianism, maintaining his approval among that group at
88% while opposition supporters disapproved at 98% and independents at 94% in
November 2017. Some opposition factions, frustrated with their inability to influence
government actions through street protests or electoral routes, called on the military to
intervene to defend the constitutional order and international actors to apply sanctions
on the government. The public was starkly polarized, but also unsatisfied with both of
the political options offered to it, with Maduro’s net national approval at -37% and the
opposition alliance MUD at -34% (Venebarometro, 2017).
   The Venezuelan case, like the Turkish case, illustrates the outcomes of polarization
when a marginalized sector of the population is mobilized to support an elite displacement, producing a backlash from old elites and increasing authoritarian behavior by
the new elites as they become the new status quo. After 18 years in power, the movement claiming to be revolutionary and democratizing increasingly resorted to corruption and undemocratic behavior to retain power.

Conclusions
We have argued that a common pattern of polarization—one that is inherently relational and with an instrumental political use—is threatening democratic norms and
governance in widely varying democracies around the world. In our conceptualization, polarization is a process in which the normal multiplicity of differences in a


McCoy et al.                                                                            35

society increasingly align along a single dimension and people increasingly perceive
and describe politics and society in terms of “Us” versus “Them.” As such polarization
deepens, it has pernicious consequences for democracy.
    Our brief review of four country cases illustrates the chain of causal mechanisms
we identified linking severe polarization to gridlock, democratic backsliding, or collapse. In cases as diverse as Hungary, Turkey, the United States, and Venezuela, we
found that elites play a critical role in constructing and/or intensifying existing cleavages or resentments with a divisive rhetoric of “Us” versus “Them” intended to mobilize a (perceived) marginalized or disunited sector of the population. More often than
not, this mobilization is also activated by some crisis, frequently a state or economic
crisis.
    In the case of Hungary, Turkey, and Venezuela, the new groups in power enacted
constitutional change to consolidate their power. They increased their electoral advantage through increasingly majoritarian electoral systems and disproportionate representation, and they eroded constraints on executive power by promoting loyalists in
the courts, electoral authorities, and security forces. In the United States, the constitution was not modified, but long-standing norms of party restraint and bipartisan consensus for major decisions were dismantled and replaced by single-party legislation
and appointment of Supreme Court justices.
    A backlash to the new groups occurred in most of the cases, as the political opposition also engaged in polarizing rhetoric, mobilized in mass protests and in Venezuela
attempted military coups.7 In the United States, the victory of Barack Obama reflecting the growing demographic diversity of the country led to a backlash first in the Tea
Party counter-mobilization and Republican obstructionist strategy in Congress, followed by Donald Trump’s successful populist mobilization of the White working class
to win the presidency.
    Initial counter-mobilizations, however, were unable to sustain themselves in
Hungary, Turkey, and Venezuela as the incumbents consolidated institutional power
and deepened a single boundary dividing the polity and society into pro- and antiincumbent camps. Affective polarization decreased social contact and intensified
zero-sum perceptions. The growing perceptions of the policies of the “Other” as a
threat to the nation in combination with the high stakes of winner-take-all electoral
systems and increasingly unlevel playing fields led to a growing tolerance of democratic norm violations.
    In Turkey and Venezuela, the anti-establishment movements led by Hugo Chavez
and Recep Tayyip Erdogan experienced the corrosive influence of power as they
became the new elites and, over time, relied on increasingly corrupt and authoritarian
behavior to maintain power. Arguably, new replacements took place within the “new
elites” as polarization disadvantaged more democratic-minded actors and empowered
those willing to resort to corruption and oppression for retaining power and selfenrichment. In Hungary and the United States, warning signs of democratic backsliding emerged with political attacks on press freedoms and scientific expertise, the
practice of majoritarian politics and loosening of institutional constraints, and the vilification of political opponents with polarizing rhetoric.


36                                                          American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

   Time will tell whether and to what extent these four cases will further converge
with each other in terms of polarizations and democratic erosions they suffer. As we
maintained in this article, their democratic futures may depend on their ability to either
reverse polarization or manage it in such ways that it will produce reformed democracy rather than the negative outcomes we focused on in this article.

Acknowledgments
We thank Bekir Ağırdır for data and Dariga Abilova, Sara Ali, Doga Cigdemoglu, İlker Kocael,
Elizabeth O’Callaghan, and Alexandra Pauley for research assistance.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.

Notes
1.   See, for example, Poole and Rosenthal (1997), Hetherington (2001), Campbell (2016),
     Abramowitz (2010), Fiorina and Abrams (2008), Fiorina, Abrams, and Pope (2008), Motyl
     (2016), Levendusky (2009) on the United States; LeBas (2006, 2011) on Africa; Handlin
     (2017), Carlin et al. (2015) on Latin America; Enyedi (2016) on Europe; Sartori (1976)
     and Dalton (2008) on political party systems; Montalvo and Reynal-Quorel (2005) on
     ethnic/linguistic fragmentation; and Esteban and Ray (1994), Duclos, Esteban, and Ray
     (2004); Quah (1997), Wang and Tsui (2000), Zhang and Kanbur (2001), Chakravarty and
     Majumder (2001) on social polarization and income stratification.
2.   Special issue on Polarized Polities: A Global Threat to Democracy, guest editors Jennifer
     McCoy and Murat Somer, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
     Sciences, forthcoming.
3.   We note that Dalton (2008) and Inglehart (1990) assert that Left–Right ideological scales
     capture the primary political and cultural differences in a society, while others assert that
     voters may have difficulty correctly locating parties on issue scales or be unwilling or
     unable to place themselves on ideological scales (Iyengar et al., 2012; Delli Carpini and
     Keeter (1993); Zechmeister, 2015). Following Vegetti (2014) and Lauka, McCoy, and
     Firat (2018), we argue that Left-Right ideological scales are insufficient to measure the
     types of polarization we are interested in as so divisive for democracies today.
4.   We distinguish between societal and social polarizations, reserving the latter concept to
     refer to socioeconomic status differences and measures of income differences (see citations
     in Note 1).
5.   Joshua Greene (2013) describes group markers including language and race; however,
     social categories leading to social preferences (favoring in-groups over out-groups) can
     also be based on arbitrary group characteristics.
6.   Most recent figures obtained from KONDA through email.
7.   Allegedly, some secularist officers planned a coup in Turkey also, but they were later


McCoy et al.                                                                                   37

     acquitted and the trials against them (and secularist civilian actors) have been discredited
     as based on fabricated evidence. After a more recent coup attempt in 2016, the government
     blamed a religious movement that used to be its close ally.

References
Abramowitz, A. (2010). The disappearing center: Engaged citizens, polarization, and American
    democracy. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Abramowitz, A. (2015). The New American Electorate: Partisan, sorted, and polarized. In J. A.
    Thurber & A. Yoshinaka (Eds.), American gridlock: The sources, character, and impact of
    political polarization (pp. 19-44). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Abramowitz, A. (2016, June 30). Donald Trump, partisan polarization, the 2016 Presidential
    election. Charlottesville: University of Virginia, Sabato’s Crystal Ball, Center for Policy
    Dialogue. Retrieved from http://www.centerforpolitics.org/crystalball/articles/donaldtrump-partisan-polarization-and-the-2016-presidential-election/
Abramowitz, A., & Webster, S. (2015, April). All politics is national: The rise of negative
    partisanship and the nationalization of U.S. house and senate elections in the 21st century. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association,
    Chicago, IL.
Abramowitz, A. I., & Webster, S. (2016). The rise of negative partisanship and the nationalization of U.S. elections in the 21st century. Electoral Studies, 41, 12-22.
Alesina, A., Baqir, R., & Easterly, W. (1999). Public goods and ethnic divisions. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 114, 1243-1284.
Alesina, A., & La Ferrara, E. (2000). Participation in heterogeneous communities. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 115(3), 847-904.
Algan, Y., & Cahuc, P. (2013). Trust and growth. Annual Review of Economics, 5, 521-549.
Authoritarian Warning Survey. (2017, November). Expert survey on American democracy.
    Washington, DC: George Washington University. Retrieved from https://www.authwarningsurvey.com/
Aydın-Düzgit, S., & Balta, E. (2017). Turkey after the July 15th coup attempt: When elites
    polarize over polarization. Istanbul, Turkey: Istanbul Policy Center.
Baldassari, D., & Bearman, P. (2007). Dynamics of political polarization. American Sociological
    Review, 72, 784-811.
Baldassarri, D., & Gelman, A. (2008). Partisans without Constraint: Political Polarization and
    trends in American public opinion. American Journal of Sociology, 114(2), 408-446.
Bishop, B. (2009). The big sort: Why the clustering of like-minded America is tearing us apart.
    Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Bogardus, E. S. (1925). Making social science studies. Los Angeles, CA: Jesse Ray Miller.
Brewer, M. B. (1999). The psychology of prejudice: Ingroup love and outgroup hate? Journal
    of Social Issues, 55(3), 429-444.
Brewer, M. D., & Stonecash, J. M. (2015). Polarization and politics of personal responsibility.
    Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Campbell, J. E. (2016). Polarized: Making sense of a divided America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press.
Carlin, R. E., Singer, M. M., & Zechmeister, E. J. (Eds.). (2015). The Latin American Voter:
    Pursuing representation and accountability in challenging contexts. Ann Arbor: University
    of Michigan Press.
Carpini, M. X. D., & Keeter, S. (1993). Measuring political knowledge: Putting first things first.
    American Journal of Political Science, 37, 1179-1206.


38                                                         American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

Chakravarty, S. R., & Majumder, A. (2001). Inequality, polarisation and welfare: Theory and
    applications. Australian Economic Papers, 40, 1-13.
Comparative Manifesto Project. (2017). Retrieved from https://manifesto-project.wzb.eu/
Corporate Social Responsibility Association of Turkey. (2016). Türkiye de Kutuplaşmanın
    Boyutları Araştırması [The dimensions of polarization in Turkey]. Istanbul, Turkey: Black
    Sea Cooperation.
Costa, D. I., & Kahn, M. E. (2003). Understanding the American decline in social capital, 19521998. Kyklos, 56(1),17-46.
Cramer, K. J. (2016). The politics of resentment: Rural consciousness in Wisconsin and the rise
    of Scott Walker. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Cristancho, C., & Firat, R. (2017, March). The social-psychology of affective polarization
    and de-polarization. Paper Prepared for Workshop on Polarized Democracies, Central
    European University, Budapest, Hungary.
Dalton, R. J. (2008). The quantity and quality of party systems: Party system polarization, its
    measurement, and its consequences. Comparative Political Studies, 41, 899-920.
Delli Carpini, M. & Keeter, S. (1993). Measuring Political Knowledge: Putting First Things
    First. American Journal of Political Science, 37(4), 1179-1206.
Diamond, L. (2015). Facing up to the democratic recession. Journal of Democracy, 26, 141-155.
Downs, A. (1957). An economic theory of political action in democracy. Journal of Political
    Economy, 65, 135-150.
Duca, J., & Saving, J. (2012). Has income inequality or media fragmentation increased political
    polarization? Unpublished manuscript, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX.
Duclos, J. Y., Esteban, J., & Ray, D. (2004). Polarization: Concepts, measurement, estimation.
    Econometrica, 72, 1737-1772.
Enyedi, Z. (2006). Party politics in post-communist transition. In R. S. Katz & W. J. Crotty
    (Eds.) Handbook of party Politics (pp. 228-238). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Enyedi, Z. (2008). The social and attitudinal basis of political parties: Cleavage politics revisited. European Review, 16, 287-304.
Enyedi, Z. (2016). Populist polarization and party system institutionalization: The role of party
    politics in de-democratization. Problems of Post-Communism, 63, 210-220.
Esen, B., & Gümüşçü, Ş. (2016). Rising competitive authoritarianism in Turkey. Third World
    Quarterly, 6597(February), 1-26.
Esen, B., & Gümüşçü, Ş. (2017). A small yes for presidentialism: The Turkish Constitutional
    Referendum of April 2017. South European Society and Politics, 22, 303-326.
Esteban, J., & Ray, D. (1994). On the measurement of polarization. Econometrica, 62, 819-851.
Esteban, J., & Schneider, G. (2008). Polarization and conflict: Theoretical and empirical issues.
    Journal of Peace Research, 45, 131-141.
Fiorina, M. P., & Abrams, S. J. (2008). Political polarization in American public. Annual Review
    of Political Science, 11, 563-588.
Fiorina, M. P., Abrams, S. A., & Pope, J. C. (2008). Polarization in the American public:
    Misconceptions and misreadings. Journal of Politics, 70, 556-560.
Freedom House. (2017). Nations in transit: Hungary country profile. Retrieved from https://
    freedomhouse.org/report/nations-transit/2017/hungary
Gaertner, S. L., Dovidio, J. F., Anastasio, P. A., Bachman, B. A., & Rust, M. C. (1993). The
    common Ingroup Identity Model: Recategorization and the reduction of intergroup bias.
    European Review of Social Psychology, 4, 1-26.


McCoy et al.                                                                                39

García-Guadilla, M., & Mallen, A. (2016, March). Polarized politics: The experience of
    Venezuela under 21st century socialism. Memo prepared for Polarized Politics Workshop,
    Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA.
Green, D., Palmquist, B., & Schickler, E. (2002). Partisan hearts and minds. New Haven, CT:
    Yale University Press.
Greene, J. (2013). Moral tribes: Emotion, reason, and the gap between us and them. New York,
    NY: Penguin Press.
Greene, S. (1999). Understanding party identification: A social identity approach. Political
    Psychology, 20, 393-403.
Hacker, J. S., & Pierson, P. (2015). Confronting asymmetric polarization. In N. Persily (Ed.),
    Solutions to political polarization in America (pp. 123-35). New York, NY: Cambridge
    University Press.
Handlin, S. (2017). State crisis in fragile democracies: Polarization and political regimes in
    South America. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Handlin, S. (2018). The logic of polarizing populism: State crises and polarization in South
    America. American Behavioral Scientist, 62(1), 75-91.
Hawkins, K. A., Riding, S., & Mudde, C. (2012). Measuring populist attitudes (Working Paper
    Series, 55). Political Concepts, Committee on Concepts and Methods.
Hetherington, M. J. (2001). Resurgent mass partisanship: The role of elite polarization.
    American Political Science Review, 95, 619-631.
Huq, A. Z., & Ginsburg, T. (forthcoming, January 18). How to lose a constitutional democracy
    (Vol. 65). UCLA Law Review.
Inglehart, R. (1990). Culture shift in advanced industrial society. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press.
Iyengar, S. (2016, January 1). E Pluribus Pluribus , or Divided We Stand. Public Opinion
    Quarterly, 80, 219-224.
Iyengar, S., Sood, G., & Lelkes, Y. (2012). Affect, not ideology: A social identity perspective
    on polarization. Public Opinion Quarterly, 76, 405-431.
Kaol, D. (2015). American political parties: Exceptional no more. Confronting asymmetric
    polarization. In N. Persily (Ed.), Solutions to political polarization in America (pp. 208217). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Katsambekis, G., & Stavrakakis, Y. (2013, July 13). Populism, anti-populism and European
    democracy: A view from the south. Open Democracy. Retrieved from https://www.opendemocracy.net/can-europe-make-it/giorgos-katsambekis-yannis-stavrakakis/populism-antipopulism-and-european-democr
King, A. A., & Anderson, F. D. (1971). Nixon, Agnew, and the “Silent Majority”: a case study
    in the rhetoric of polarization. Western Speech, 35, 243-255.
Kleinberg, M. S., & Lau, R. R. (2016). Candidate extremity, information environments, and
    affective polarization: Three experiments using dynamic process tracing. In A. Blais, J. F.
    Laslier, & K. Van der Straeten (Eds.), Voting experiments (pp. 67-87). Cham, Switzerland:
    Springer International.
Knuckey, J., & Kim, M. (2015). Racial resentment, old-fashioned racism, and the vote choice
    of Southern and Nonsouthern Whites in the 2012 U.S. Presidential Election. Social Science
    Quarterly, 96, 905-922.
KONDA. (2017). Konda barometer. Istanbul, Turkey: Author. Retrieved from http://konda.
    com.tr/en/konda-barometer/


40                                                          American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

Kreps, T. A., Laurin, K., & Merritt, A. C. (2017). Hypocritical flip-flop, or courageous evolution? When leaders change their moral minds. Journal of Personality and Social
    Psychology, 113, 730-752.
Lauka, A., McCoy, J., & Firat, R. (2018). Mass partisan polarization: Measuring a relational
    concept. American Behavioral Scientist, 62(1), 107-126.
LeBas, A. (2006). Polarization as craft: Explaining party formation and state violence in
    Zimbabwe. Comparative Politics, 38(4), 419-438.
LeBas, A. (2011). From protest to parties: Party-building and democratization in Africa.
    Oxford. England: Oxford University Press.
LeBas, A. (2018). Can polarization be positive? Conflict and institutional development in
    Africa. American Behavioral Scientist, 62(1), 59-74.
Lengyel, G., & Ilonszki, G. (2010). Hungary: Between consolidated and simulated democracy.
    In H. Best & J. Higley (Eds.), Democratic elitism (pp. 150-168). Leiden, the Netherlands:
    Brill.
Letki, N. (2008). Does diversity erode social cohesion? Social capital and race in British neighborhoods. Political Studies, 56, 99-126.
Levendusky, M. (2009). The partisan sort: How liberals became Democrats and conservatives
    became Republicans. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Levendusky, M. S., & Malhotra, N. (2013). (Mis)perception of partisan polarization in American
    public. Public Opinion Quarterly, 80(S1), 378-391.
Levitsky, S., & Ziblatt, D. (2016, December 16). Is Donald Trump a threat to democracy? The
    New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/16/opinion/sunday/isdonald-trump-a-threat-to-democracy.html?_r=0
Lozada, M., (2014). Us or them? Social representations and imaginaries of the other in
    Venezuela, Papers on Social Representations, 23(2), 21.1-21.16.
Lupu, N. (2015). Party polarization and mass partisanship: A comparative perspective. Political
    Behavior, 37(2), 331-356.
Mallen, A., & García-Guadilla, M. (2017). Venezuela’s polarized politics: The paradox of
    direct democracy under Chavez. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Mason, L. (2015). “I disrespectfully agree”: The differential effects of partisan sorting on social
    and issue polarization. American Journal of Political Science, 59, 128-145.
McCoy, J., & Diez, F. (2011). International mediation in Venezuela. Washington DC: United
    States Institute of Peace.
McCoy, J. L., & Myers, D. J. (2004). The unraveling of representative democracy in Venezuela.
    Baltimore. MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
McCoy, J., & Rahman, T. (2016, July). Polarized democracies in comparative perspective:
    A comparative framework. Paper presented at the International Political Association
    Conference. Pozan, Poland.
Montalvo, J. G., & Reynal-Querol, M. (2005). Ethnic polarization, potential conflict, and civil
    wars. American Economic Review, 95, 796-816.
Morgan, S., & Lee, J. (2017). The White working class and voter turnout in U.S. Presidential
    Elections, 2004 to 2016. Sociological Science, 4, 656-685.
Motyl, M. (2016). Liberals and Conservatives are (geographically) dividing. In P. Valdesolo &
    J. Graham (Eds.), Social psychology of political polarization (pp. 7-37). New York, NY:
    Routledge.
Niemi, R. G., Weisberg, H. F., & Kimball, D. C. (Eds.). (2001). Controversies in voting behavior. Washington, DC: CQ Press.


McCoy et al.                                                                                   41

Öktem, K., & Akkoyunlu, K. (Eds.). (2017). Exit from democracy: Illiberal governance in
     Turkey and beyond. London, England: Routledge.
Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2006). A meta-analytic test of inter-group theory: Interpersonal
     relations and group processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 751783.
Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). How does intergroup contact reduce prejudice? Metaanalytic tests of three mediators. European Journal of Social Psychology, 38, 922-934.
Pew Research Center. (2016). Partisanship and political animosity in 2016. Washington, DC:
     Author. Retrieved from http://www.people-press.org/2016/06/22/partisanship-and-politicalanimosity-in-2016/
Poole, K. T., & Rosenthal, H. (1997). Congress: A political-economic history of roll call voting.
     New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Prior, M. (2007). Post-broadcast democracy: How Media choice increases inequality in political involvement and polarizes elections. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Przeworski, A. (1986). Some problems in the study of transition to democracy. In G. O’Donnell,
     A. Schmitter, C. Philippe, & L. Whitehead (Eds.). Transitions from authoritarian rule:
     Comparative perspectives (pp. 47-64). Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center.
Quah, D. T. (1997). Empirics for growth and distribution: Stratification, polarization, and convergence clubs. Journal of Economic Growth, 2, 27-59.
Rodrik, D. (1999). Where did all the growth go? External shocks, social conflict, and growth
     collapses. Journal of Economic Growth, 4, 385-412.
Ryan, T. J. (2017). No compromise: Political consequences of moralized attitudes. American
     Journal of Political Science, 61, 409-423.
Sapolsky, R. M. (2017). Behave: The biology of humans at our best and worst. New York, NY:
     Penguin Press.
Sartori, G. (1976). Party and party system. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Schmitt, C. (1996). The concept of political. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Skitka, L. J. (2002). Do the means always justify the ends or do the ends sometimes justify the
     means? A value Protection Model of Justice. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
     28, 452-461.
Skitka, L. J., Bauman, C. W., & Lytle, B. L. (2009). Limits on legitimacy: Moral and religious
     convictions as constraints on deference to authority. Journal of Personality and Social
     Psychology, 97, 567-578.
Skocpol, T., & Williamson, V. (2012). The tea party and the remaking of Republican conservatism. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Slater, D., (2016, March). Polarization without poles: Oligarchy, populism, and democratic
     careening. Memo prepared for Polarized Politics Workshop, Georgia State University,
     Atlanta, GA.
Somer, M., (2001). Cascades of ethnic polarization: Lessons from Yugoslavia. Annals of the
     American Academy of Political and Social Science, 573, 127-151.
Somer, M. (2005). Failures of the discourse of ethnicity: Turkey, Kurds, and the emerging Iraq.
     Security Dialogue, 36, 109-128.
Somer, M. (2014). Moderation of religious and secular politics, a country’s “Center” and
     Democratization. Democratization, 21, 244-267.
Somer, M. (2016a, March). Religious versus secular and power sharing versus hegemonizing politics and polarization in Turkey. Memo prepared for Polarized Politics Workshop,
     Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA.


42                                                          American Behavioral Scientist 62(1)

Somer, M. (2016b). Understanding Turkey’s democratic breakdown: Old versus new and indigenous versus global authoritarianism. Southeast European and Black Sea Studies, 16, 481503.
Stavrakakis, Y. (2016, March). Paradoxes of polarization and the Greek case. Memo presented
    at Polarized Politics Workshop, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA.
Svolik, M. W. (2012). The politics of authoritarian rule. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
    University Press.
Tajfel, H. (1970). Experiments in intergroup discrimination. Scientific American, 223, 96-103.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In W. G. Austin
    & S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 33-47). Monterey,
    CA: Brooks/Cole.
Tesler, M. (2016). Post-racial or most-racial? Race and politics in the Obama Era. Chicago,
    IL: University of Chicago Press.
Tóka, G., & Popa, S. A. (2013). Hungary. In S. Berglund, J. Ekman, & F. H. Aarebrot (Eds.),
    Handbook of political change in Eastern Europe (pp. 291-338). Cheltenham, England:
    Edward Elgar.
V-Dem [Country-Year/Country-Date] Dataset v7. (2017, May). Varieties of democracy
    (V-Dem) project. Retrieved from https://www.v-dem.net/en/data/data-version-7/
Vegetti, F. (2014). From political conflict to partisan evaluations: How citizens assess party
    ideology and competence in polarized elections. Electoral Studies, 35, 230-241.
Vegetti, F. (in press). Political polarization in Hungary. Annals of the American Academy of
    Political and Social Sciences.
Venebarometro National Poll. (2017, December). Caracas, Venezuela.
Wang, Y. Q., & Tsui, K. Y. (2000). Polarization orderings and new classes of polarization indices. Journal of Public Economic Theory, 2, 349-363.
Zechmeister, E. J. (2015). Left-right identification and the Latin American voter. In R. E. Carlin,
    M. M. Singer, & E. J. Zechmeister (Eds.), The Latin American voter: Pursuing representation and accountability in challenging contexts (pp. 195-225). Ann Arbor: University of
    Michigan Press.
Zhang, X., & Kanbur, R. (2001). What difference do polarisation measures make? An application to China. Journal of Development Studies, 37(3), 85-98.

Author Biographies
Jennifer McCoy is Distinguished University Professor of Political Science at Georgia State
University and coordinates an international research group on political polarization. Her most
recent book is International Mediation in Venezuela.
Tahmina Rahman is a PhD candidate in political science at Georgia State University and an
assistant professor of International Relations at the University of Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Murat Somer is an associate professor of political science and international relations at Koç
University. His research on democratization, polarization, religious and secular politics, and
ethnic conflict appeared in books, book volumes, and journals such as Comparative Political
Studies and Democratization.