Attributed Stream-Hypernetwork analysis:
    Homophilic Behaviors in Pairwise and Group
           Political Discussions on Reddit

           Andrea Failla1 , Salvatore Citraro1 , and Giulio Rossetti2
             Computer Science department, University of Pisa, Italy
                     salvatore.citraro@phd.unipi.it
                       a.failla@studenti.unipi.it,
           KDD Laboratory, ISTI, National Research Council, Pisa, Italy
                      giulio.rossetti@isti.cnr.it


      Abstract. Complex networks are solid models to describe human behavior. However, most analyses employing them are bounded to observations made on dyadic connectivity, whereas complex human dynamics
      involve higher-order relations as well. In the last few years, hypergraph
      models are rising as promising tools to better understand the behavior
      of social groups. Yet even such higher-order representations ignore the
      importance of the rich attributes carried by the nodes. In this work we introduce ASH, an Attributed Stream-Hypernetwork framework to model
      higher-order temporal networks with attributes on nodes. We leverage
      ASH to study pairwise and group political discussions on the well-known
      Reddit platform. Our analysis unveils different patterns while looking at
      either a pairwise or a higher-order structure for the same phenomena.
      In particular, we find out that Reddit users tends to surround themselves by like-minded peers with respect to their political leaning when
      online discussions are proxied by pairwise interactions; conversely, such
      a tendency significantly decreases when considering nodes embedded in
      higher-order contexts - that often describe heterophilic discussions.

      Keywords: High-order Networks, Dynamic Networks, Feature-rich Networks, Data Analysis


1    Introduction
Several human behaviors can be described through the lens of complex network
analysis. From homophily [20] to the time-evolving nature of social groups [14],
complex networks can shed lights on the laws governing nodes’ wiring patterns
and their evolution as time goes by as well. However, the intrinsic nature of
network connectivity can not explicitly go beyond dyadic patterns, i.e., coupling
between pairs of nodes. Such pairwise constraints must be taken into account
when aiming to investigate the behavior of social groups and their complex
dynamics. Hypernetwork science is the new, cutting-edge line of research that
aims to address higher-order structures for representing and analyzing complex


2      Andrea Failla et al.

systems [1, 3, 27]. In this work we consider such higher-order structures involved
in dynamic and attribute-aware environments as well. This way we propose to
study a phenomenon along three main dimensions: topology, dynamic features
and node attributes, plus any preferred combination of these. To this purpose we
introduce ASH, an Attributed S tream-H ypernetwork model to represent higherorder temporal networks with attributive information on nodes. To test ASH’s
potentiality, we infer the attribute-rich higher-order temporal structure of group
political discussions on the well-known Reddit platform. In particular, we focus
on data collected from the debate between Trump supporters and anti-Trump
citizens as described in [18] along three main topics: gun legalization, minorities
discrimination and general debates on the US political sphere. We aim to explore
to what extent users are homogeneously embedded in group discussions when
modelling the higher-order structure, then compare these results to the ones
obtained mining the pairwise network only.
    The rest of the work is organized as follows. Section 2 sums up the principal literature on the three main complex network contexts surrounding this
work, namely dynamic, node-attributed, and higher-order networks. Section 3
introduces our Attributed Stream-Hypernetwork model. Section 4 discusses our
main results on the selected datasets. Finally, Section 5 concludes the work and
discusses promising lines of research left open for the future.


2   Related work

We provide in the following an overview of the main enriched network models
used in this work. First, we discuss dynamic and node-attributed network representations [16]; then, we sum up the emerging contributions about higher-order
representations for complex systems.

Dynamics of networks. Nowadays the temporal dimension is increasingly
available from network data representing human behaviors. However, choosing
a proper representation for modelling interaction dynamics is not a straightforward task. Friendships are persistent over time, whereas face-to-face interactions
involve a certain duration, and e-mails or financial transactions are even instantaneous. Different temporal semantics imposes different modelling strategies [14,
24]. We can identify dynamic network models by selection of different criteria:
i) stability, e.g., the snapshot sequence from a time-window aggregation strategy [23, 6]; ii) duration, e.g., the interval graph model [14]; and iii) immediacy,
e.g., the stream graph [17], where a dynamic network comes as a stream of both
temporal nodes and interactions. Stream graphs, in particular, can easily extend
and generalize classic centrality measures on static graphs [26], and multi-layer
structure as well [21]. Among the most interesting and cutting-edge tasks on dynamic networks we can mention community detection [24], link prediction [13],
and mixing pattern estimation [10].

Networks with metadata. Similarly to temporal information, metadata or


                                 Attributed Stream-Hypernetwork analysis        3

attributes describing nodes’ properties are often available from network data.
Metadata-enriched models can support augmented mining and analyses about
the relationships between the structural and the attributive information in complex systems. Most of the works focusing on the interplay between structure and
attributes aim to study the correlation between the two dimensions, searching
for bridges between tabular and networked data [28]. Node attributes can be
fruitfully used for improving the community detection task, where both tight
connectivity and label-homogeneity within communities need to be guaranteed
[8]. They can be also leveraged for estimating heterogeneous mixing patterns
in complex networks [22, 25]. The distribution of metadata surrounding a single
node, e.g., the distribution of features within the node’s ego-network, is particularly useful in the node classification and in the link prediction tasks [4].

Higher-order networks. Although traditional network science mostly addressed
analyses on pairwise interactions, many network dynamics can be better modelled by higher-order representations involving relations between groups of nodes.
As an emerging line of research [3, 27], the expressive power of such representations is yet largely unexplored. The interest in the physics of higher-order
interactions is growing [2], and it has been mainly explored in the context of
diffusion analysis, e.g., studying social contagion with simplicial complexes [15],
in time-varying settings as well [7]. Higher-order structures varying in time are
an important and emerging trend of research [5]. In [12], three distinct types
of hypergraph neighborhoods are introduced: star, radial and contracted egonetworks. The star ego-network of a node u is the set of all the hyperedges that
include u, whereas the other two include also the hyperedges whose nodes within
are all u’s neighbors (radial) or further extends u’s neighborhood to the hyperedges that interact with nodes outside of u’s ego-network (contracted). The differences between the three ego-networks is interesting when studying them from
a temporal perspective: some hyperedges included in the radial and contracted
neighborhoods may have begun a time before the target node u joined the context [12]. In most of such analyses, the higher-order structure of static/dynamic
networks is addressed by investigating datasets originally designed for graphbased analysis, thus one of the most intriguing future challenges is the inference
of statistically significant higher-order interactions from complex systems [19].
Moreover, higher-order-based techniques are emerging to generalize well-known
graph-based techniques or to conservatively shift to them, as in the case of s-line
graph analysis for hypergraph models [1].


3   Attributed Stream-Hypergraphs

To study dynamic high-order social interactions, simply borrowing results from
the existing literature is not enough. Hypergraphs and simplicial complexes,
to name the nowadays most used high-order representation frameworks, have
both strengths and weaknesses. None of them has been adequately defined in
the presence of evolving topologies. Indeed, their applicability to online social


4         Andrea Failla et al.

environments needs to be carefully analyzed to understand if the constraint they
come with aligns with the semantics expressed by social interaction networks.
Moreover, individuals embedded in a social system can often be characterized
by multiple features — profiles that contextualize some of the key properties
playing a role for social interactions (e.g., nationality, gender, age. . . ). To start
filling the existing gap in high-order dynamic and feature-rich modeling of social
systems, here we propose the framework of Attributed Stream Hypergraphs.

Definition 1 (Attributed Stream Hypergraph (ASH)).
Let S = (T, V, W, E, L) be a stream hypergraph, where:
    – T = [A, Ω] is the set of discrete time instants, with A and Ω the initial and
      final instants;
    – V is the set of the nodes of the temporally flattened hypergraph;
    – W ⊆ T × V is the set of temporal nodes;
    – E ⊆ T × V n is the set of temporal hyperedges such that (t, N ) ∈ E implies
      that N ⊆ V and ∀ui ∈ N, (t, ui ) ∈ W ;
    – L is the set of temporal node attributes such that L(t, u) with (t, u) ∈ W and
      t ∈ T , identifies the set of categorical values associated to u at time t.

    ASHs are a conservative extension of well known modeling frameworks (namely,
hypergraphs [3] and stream graphs [17]). From them it inherits several analytical peculiarities and, from their union, it is able to provide novel insights that
the original models are not able to unveil independently. Moreover, integrating
time evolving node attributes, it allows to study not only how individuals’ characteristics changes (e.g., opinions, political leaning) but also how such changes
relate/affect the topological structure surrounding them.
    In the following we provide a first example of how ASH can be used to study
real world phenomena. Our analysis will focus on some aspects of the three
dimensions modeled by ASH: high-order topology, node semantics and time.


4      Experiments
Sociopolitical Reddit data. We focus on data collected from the debate between Trump supporters and anti-Trump citizens during the first two and half
years of Donald Trump’s presidency, covering a period between January 2017
and July 2019. Data collection, users’ ideology inference and network construction are properly described in the reference paper [18] (thus identifying three
users’ families: protrump, antitrump and neutral). Leveraging the original temporal network3 , we infer the hypergraph structure by means of all the maximal
cliques. As in the original analysis about this dataset, [18], we consider a timewindow of six months when analyzing system interactions’ dynamics. Average
statistics for the pairwise graphs are shown in Table 1.
    The three main topics considered are the followings:
    Original network     data    available   at   https://github.com/virgiiim/EC Reddit
    CaseStudy.


                                  Attributed Stream-Hypernetwork analysis         5

           Topic            # nodes # edges # Pro-Trump # Anti-Trump # Neutral
       Gun Control           4992    15298      3346        1645         –
  Minorities Discrimination  5541    12605      3318        2222         –
      Political Sphere       4509     7079      1280        2395        834
Table 1: Network statistics (averaged across semesters). size of the network in
terms of nodes and edges, number of users with a Pro-Trump, Anti-Trump or
Neutral leaning score.


 – Gun Control : this topic is identified by collecting lists of subreddits that
   either support gun legalization or are against it;
 – Minorities Discrimination: identified by considering groups that promote
   gender/racial/sexual equality and groups showing more conservative attitudes;
 – Political Sphere: identified by covering different US political ideologies such
   as Republicans, Democrats, Liberals, and Populists.

Among these topics, the first two ones are controversial/polarizing sociopolitical
issues, whereas the latter one is intended to offer a more broad spectrum of the
US political debate.

Analytical setting. We set a four-fold framework to analyze ideology homogeneity from different perspectives as in the following:

  i we promote an analysis on dyadic interactions, and we measure how much
    users are homogeneously embedded in their pairwise ego-networks;
 ii we shift the focus from individual users to groups, and we measure the homophily of such groups/contexts modelled as hyperedges;
iii we return to individual users, adopting the single user point of view while
    measuring how much an user is embedded in the contexts/hyperedges where
    he/she participates;
iv we introduce a time-aware analysis to track stability or variations in ideology
    homogeneity.

     As a preliminary question we aim to explore whether different behaviours
emerge among individual users (i) and groups (ii): can higher-order interactions
capture patterns which are invisible to dyadic interactions? Then, we aim to
understand the role of single users in the several contexts where they participate (iii), as a meeting point between the two previous points: can higher-order
neighborhoods capture different patterns that graph ego-networks cannot? Finally, the focus on interactions’ dynamics (iv) would allow us to track stable or
mutable patterns as time goes by.
     Pay attention to the fact that computations in (i) and (iii) are different from
(ii). In (i) and (iii) we use a measure of homogeneity to estimate target nodes’
similarity within nodes own contexts. The focus is on single nodes and we aim to
measure the homogeneity of the contexts with respect to the political leaning of
a specific target node. In detail, the homogeneity within the context of a target


6      Andrea Failla et al.

node with respect to the node own ideology is computed as the relative frequency
of the attribute value carried by the node within the context that embeds it:

                                         |{v|v ∈ c ∧ lu = lv }|
                    Homogeneity(u) =                            ,             (1)
                                                  |c|
    where u is the target node with lu as attribute value, c is the context where
u is embedded, and lv is the attribute value of a node v that belongs to c.
In the pairwise network, c is the first-order neighborhood, namely the set of
nodes adjacent to u. In the hypergraph, c is the set of hyperedges of u’s star
ego-network. Since a hyperedge includes several nodes, we must associate to the
context expressed by the hyperedge a characteristic value of such a context;
coherently with the choice to measure the homogeneity with respect to a target
node neighborhood, we set as the characteristic value of a hyperedge the most
frequent attribute value of the nodes participating in it.
    Finally, the homogeneity of the hypergraph is defined as the average of all
its nodes’ homogeneities:
                                       1 X
                   Homogeneity =           Homogeneity(u).                    (2)
                                      |V |
                                         u∈V

   Conversely, in (ii) the focus is on hyperedges’ homogeneities. Thus, we use
a particular instantiation of the homogeneity measure, namely the purity [11],
that computes the relative frequency of the most frequent attribute value within
the hyperedge:
                                              P
                                      maxl∈L ( v∈e lv )
                         P urity(e) =                   ,                    (3)
                                             |e|
   where e is the target hyperedge, and v is a node participating in it with lv
as attribute value. This way we only capture the characteristic behaviour of a
target hyperedge.
   Finally, the purity of the hypergraph is defined as the average of all its
hyperedges’ purities:
                                       1 X
                          P urity =        P urity(e).                        (4)
                                      |E|
                                         e∈E


Results
Pairwise ego-networks reveal both homophilic and heterophilic users’ preferences.
Fig. 1 outlines graph ego-networks’ homogeneities in the three topics considered.
Results are aggregated over the semesters. The analysis on pairwise interactions captures both homophilic and heterophilic patterns. In GunControl, there
emerges heterogeneity in antitrump and protrump users, where the latter ones
appear to be more likely to engage with similar users. Conversely, an overall
strong homophilic distribution emerges in Minority, whose homogeneity values
for both antitrump and protrump nodes mostly gather around the upper bound.


                                  Attributed Stream-Hypernetwork analysis        7


Fig. 1: KDE’s distributions of pairwise ego-networks’ homogeneity among the
three different Reddit communities.


Again, a strong difference is visible in Politics, where protrump and neutral users
are less homogeneous than antitrump ones. All these observations are coherent
with the analyses performed on the original data paper [18], where in Minority
and Politics it is more likely to observe echo-chambers – oriented towards a protrump political leaning in Minority, and antitrump in Politics, while GunControl
discussions are less polarized.

Hyperedges’ purity emphasizes homogeneous discussions.
Fig. 2 (a) gives us a global overview of ideology homogeneity within the contexts/hyperedges in the three topics considered. Results are aggregated over
the semesters. The bimodal distributions observed in all the categories reflect
similarly to graph ego-networks what already emerged on the same data while
identifying echo chambers at the meso-scale community level [18]: GunControl
does not present strongly polarized communities [i.e., echo chambers] among different semesters (p. 12) [18] as well as it seems that only a bunch of contexts
present quite perfect purity (Fig. 2 (a), leftmost); [in Minority] on average, more
than half of total users are trapped in echo chambers (p. 12) [18], and hyperedge
purities show a quite similar pattern as well, with a tendency of protrump users
to form more homogeneous groups (Fig. 2 (a), center); also Politics presents
high homogeneity contexts, where antitrump users are more likely to form homogeneous groups (Fig. 2 (a), rightmost). Nonetheless, this analysis leveraging
higher-order contexts reveals more heterogeneity in the dataset and emphasizes
different behaviours among users, even when focusing on the purity only. Moreover, all these patterns are observed with respect to the hyperedge size as well.
Fig. 2 (b-c) highlight, respectively, the number (b) and the average purity (c)
of pure-groups in function of the group size. For instance, in Minority we observe that only protrump pure discussions involve groups with more than 7
participants, and that they are quite pure, 0.9. The same does not happen in
GunControl, while in Politics the biggest contexts involve antitrump users only
but with a lower purity than the one of protrump users in Minority.

Users are involved in heterogeneous debates.
As can be observed in Fig. 3, the topics show diversified behaviours when the


8       Andrea Failla et al.


                                         (a)


                                        (b)


                                         (c)

Fig. 2: KDE’s distributions of hyperedges’ purity (a), number of pure hyperedges
(b) and average purity (c) in function of hyperedge size among the three different
Reddit communities.


analysis shifts to star egos, which describe the hypernetworks at the meso-scale
level while maintaining local information about individual nodes. Indeed, there
is no more trace of the bimodal patterns observed in Fig. 2 (a), with the sole
exceptions of antitrump nodes in Minority and neutral ones in Politics. The key
insight, however, relates to the heterogeneity of user debates. While engaging
in relatively homogeneous contexts (Fig. 2), it seems that users find themselves
in rather mixed collections of debates. That is to say, although homophilic behaviour is highlighted in most debates (hyperedges), the set of contexts a node
is involved in (its star) is generally diversified w.r.t. ideology/political leaning.
This is especially true in GunControl, where protrump users appear to engage
in a more heterogeneous set of debates than their counterparts, as opposed to
what was noted in Fig. 2 (a). The same holds for Politics, which displays a peak
in heterogeneous protrump stars while antitrump stars show more homophilic
behavior. Minority, instead, still shows strong homogeneity traits for both anAttributed Stream-Hypernetwork analysis        9


Fig. 3: KDE’s distributions of hypergraph star ego-networks’ homogeneity among
the three different Reddit communities.


Fig. 4: Average hypergraph star ego-networks’ homogeneity over time among the
three different Reddit communities.


titrump and protrump users, thus confirming previous observations.

Interactions’ dynamics: users’ preferences tend to be consistent in time.
As far as the temporal dimension is concerned, a certain degree of consistency
w.r.t. debates homogeneity/heterogeneity can be observed. As a matter of fact,
the average star homogeneity outlines almost-flat trends (Fig. 4), indicating minor variations. Here, GunControl and Minority reveal near-constant heterogeneity/homogeneity for both political alignments; lastly, Politics displays only a
small bump during the third semester concerning protrump and neutral users.


5   Discussion and Conclusions
In this work we described and applied ASH, our new framework to represent
streams of higher-order interactions enriched with node attributes as Attributed
Stream-Hypernetworks. This way a complex phenomenon can be described along
several dimensions, namely topology, node-features, and interaction dynamics,
plus any combination of these as preferred by the analyst of a specific domain
[16]. We applied our framework to study group political discussions on Reddit,
analyzing to what extent politically oriented users are homogeneously embedded
in group discussions with respect to group’s representative political leaning. Even
if not mainly related to the identification/analysis of echo chambers, this work


10      Andrea Failla et al.

gave us another perspective to interpret the homophilic patterns emerging from
controversial political debates on social platforms. Our results can support the
claim of users aggregation in similar/homophilic contexts/hyperedges, but this
result may not necessarily involve segregation [9]. In fact, While applying our
framework to the Reddit communities, we observed strong homophilic behaviors among groups/hyperedges with respect to users’ political leaning. However,
while focusing on the preferences of single nodes, namely on how much a target
node is homogeneously embedded with respect to the representative political
leaning of the groups/hyperedges it belongs to, we mostly observe a relevant decrease in nodes’ homophilic behaviors. As a consequence, we observe that users
prefer participating in contexts whose representative leaning is different than
the target node own label, although hyperedges are strongly homophilic per se.
Interestingly, this pattern can not be observed when looking at the pairwise
ego-networks only. Finally, regarding the interaction dynamics, we mainly observe stability and consistency over time with respect to users’ political leaning.
In future works, we plan to work with more datasets that can better involve
changes along the temporal dimension. Also, we plan to define domain-specific
measures based on a solid characterization of node profiles, leveraging them
to better analyze higher-order structure dynamics. Lastly, we plan to formalize
more consistently the ASH framework, as already done for recent generalizations
of dynamic networks as stream graphs [17].


Acknowledgments This work is supported by the European Union – Horizon
2020 Program under the scheme ”INFRAIA-01-2018-2019 – Integrating Activities for Advanced Communities”, Grant Agreement n.871042, ”SoBigData++:
European Integrated Infrastructure for Social Mining and Big Data Analytics”
(http://www.sobigdata.eu).


References
 1. Aksoy, S.G., Joslyn, C., Marrero, C.O., Praggastis, B., Purvine, E.: Hypernetwork
    science via high-order hypergraph walks. EPJ Data Science 9(1), 16 (2020)
 2. Battiston, F., Amico, E., Barrat, A., Bianconi, G., Ferraz de Arruda, G.,
    Franceschiello, B., Iacopini, I., Kéfi, S., Latora, V., Moreno, Y., et al.: The physics
    of higher-order interactions in complex systems. Nature Physics 17(10), 1093–1098
    (2021)
 3. Battiston, F., Cencetti, G., Iacopini, I., Latora, V., Lucas, M., Patania, A., Young,
    J.G., Petri, G.: Networks beyond pairwise interactions: structure and dynamics.
    Physics Reports 874, 1–92 (2020)
 4. Bhagat, S., Cormode, G., Muthukrishnan, S.: Node classification in social networks.
    In: Social network data analytics, pp. 115–148. Springer (2011)
 5. Cencetti, G., Battiston, F., Lepri, B., Karsai, M.: Temporal properties of higherorder interactions in social networks. Scientific reports 11(1), 1–10 (2021)
 6. Chiappori, A., Cazabet, R.: Quantitative evaluation of snapshot graphs for the
    analysis of temporal networks. In: International Conference on Complex Networks
    and Their Applications. pp. 566–577. Springer (2021)


                                     Attributed Stream-Hypernetwork analysis            11

 7. Chowdhary, S., Kumar, A., Cencetti, G., Iacopini, I., Battiston, F.: Simplicial
    contagion in temporal higher-order networks. Journal of Physics: Complexity 2(3),
    035019 (2021)
 8. Chunaev, P.: Community detection in node-attributed social networks: a survey.
    Computer Science Review 37, 100286 (2020)
 9. Cinelli, M., Morales, G.D.F., Galeazzi, A., Quattrociocchi, W., Starnini, M.: The
    echo chamber effect on social media. Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences 118(9) (2021)
10. Citraro, S., Milli, L., Cazabet, R., Rossetti, G.: δ-conformity: Multi-scale node
    assortativity in feature-rich stream graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.15534 (2021)
11. Citraro, S., Rossetti, G.: Identifying and exploiting homogeneous communities in
    labeled networks. Applied Network Science 5(1), 1–20 (2020)
12. Comrie, C., Kleinberg, J.: Hypergraph ego-networks and their temporal evolution.
    In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM). pp. 91–100.
    IEEE (2021)
13. Divakaran, A., Mohan, A.: Temporal link prediction: A survey. New Generation
    Computing 38(1), 213–258 (2020)
14. Holme, P., Saramäki, J.: Temporal networks. Physics reports 519(3), 97–125 (2012)
15. Iacopini, I., Petri, G., Barrat, A., Latora, V.: Simplicial models of social contagion.
    Nature communications 10(1), 1–9 (2019)
16. Interdonato, R., Atzmueller, M., Gaito, S., Kanawati, R., Largeron, C., Sala, A.:
    Feature-rich networks: going beyond complex network topologies. Applied Network
    Science 4(1), 1–13 (2019)
17. Latapy, M., Viard, T., Magnien, C.: Stream graphs and link streams for the modeling of interactions over time. Social Network Analysis and Mining 8(1), 1–29
    (2018)
18. Morini, V., Pollacci, L., Rossetti, G.: Toward a standard approach for echo chamber
    detection: Reddit case study. Applied Sciences 11(12), 5390 (2021)
19. Musciotto, F., Battiston, F., Mantegna, R.N.: Detecting informative higher-order
    interactions in statistically validated hypergraphs. Communications Physics 4(1),
    1–9 (2021)
20. Newman, M.E.: Mixing patterns in networks. Physical review E 67(2), 026126
    (2003)
21. Parmentier, P., Viard, T., Renoust, B., Baffier, J.F.: Introducing multilayer stream
    graphs and layer centralities. In: International Conference on Complex Networks
    and Their Applications. pp. 684–696. Springer (2019)
22. Peel, L., Delvenne, J.C., Lambiotte, R.: Multiscale mixing patterns in networks.
    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115(16), 4057–4062 (2018)
23. Ribeiro, B., Perra, N., Baronchelli, A.: Quantifying the effect of temporal resolution
    on time-varying networks. Scientific reports 3(1), 1–5 (2013)
24. Rossetti, G., Cazabet, R.: Community discovery in dynamic networks: a survey.
    ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 51(2), 1–37 (2018)
25. Rossetti, G., Citraro, S., Milli, L.: Conformity: a path-aware homophily measure
    for node-attributed networks. IEEE Intelligent Systems 36(1), 25–34 (2021)
26. Simard, F., Magnien, C., Latapy, M.: Computing betweenness centrality in link
    streams. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06543 (2021)
27. Torres, L., Blevins, A.S., Bassett, D., Eliassi-Rad, T.: The why, how, and when of
    representations for complex systems. SIAM Review 63(3), 435–485 (2021)
28. Zanin, M., Papo, D., Sousa, P.A., Menasalvas, E., Nicchi, A., Kubik, E., Boccaletti,
    S.: Combining complex networks and data mining: why and how. Physics Reports
    635, 1–44 (2016)