PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                       ARI       7 April 2013      1:28


                                                                                                                                     ANNUAL
                                                                                                                                     REVIEWS   Further                            Media and Political Polarization
                                                                                                                                     Click here for quick links to
                                                                                                                                     Annual Reviews content online,
                                                                                                                                     including:
                                                                                                                                                                                  Markus Prior
                                                                                                                                    • Other articles in this volume               Woodrow Wilson School and Department of Politics, Princeton University, Princeton,
                                                                                                                                    • Top cited articles                          New Jersey 08544-1013; email: mprior@princeton.edu
                                                                                                                                    • Top downloaded articles
                                                                                                                                    • Our comprehensive search


                                                                                                                            Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 2013. 16:101–27                Keywords
                                                                                                                            First published online as a Review in Advance on      audience measurement, selective exposure, news media, media bias, media
                                                                                                                            February 1, 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                  effects, activists
                                                                                                                            The Annual Review of Political Science is online at
                                                                                                                            http://polisci.annualreviews.org                      Abstract
                                                                                                                            This article’s doi:                                   This article examines if the emergence of more partisan media has con10.1146/annurev-polisci-100711-135242
                                                                                                                                                                                  tributed to political polarization and led Americans to support more partisan
                                                                                                                            Copyright   c 2013 by Annual Reviews.                policies and candidates. Congress and some newer media outlets have added
                                                                                                                            All rights reserved
                                                                                                                                                                                  more partisan messages to a continuing supply of mostly centrist news. Although political attitudes of most Americans have remained fairly moderate,
                                                                                                                                                                                  evidence points to some polarization among the politically involved. Proliferation of media choices lowered the share of less interested, less partisan
                                                                                                                                                                                  voters and thereby made elections more partisan. But evidence for a causal
                                                                                                                                                                                  link between more partisan messages and changing attitudes or behaviors is
                                                                                                                                                                                  mixed at best. Measurement problems hold back research on partisan selective exposure and its consequences. Ideologically one-sided news exposure
                                                                                                                                                                                  may be largely conﬁned to a small, but highly involved and inﬂuential, segment of the population. There is no ﬁrm evidence that partisan media are
                                                                                                                                                                                  making ordinary Americans more partisan.
PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                         MEDIA AND POLITICAL POLARIZATION
                                                                                                                                         Has the emergence of more partisan media created political polarization and led the American
                                                                                                                                         public to support more partisan policies and candidates? Concern is growing about the pernicious
                                                                                                                                         impact of fervently populist or ideological rhetoric displayed on cable news, talk radio, and the
                                                                                                                                         Internet. Pundits, commentators, and some social scientists worry about the inﬂuence of ﬁrebrands


                                                                                                                                         like Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity, and Keith Olbermann. Some fear that less knowledgeable
                                                                                                                                         Americans are particularly seduced by the seeming simplicity of their populist worldviews. Others
                                                                                                                                         suspect that ideologically unambiguous content increasingly attracts viewers and listeners who
                                                                                                                                         share the hosts’ political leanings, thus reinforcing partisan views and contributing to political
                                                                                                                                         polarization. These are important concerns, especially in a heated political climate in which the
                                                                                                                                         fringes appear eager to escalate. By some measures, the general public appears more partisan as well.
                                                                                                                                         Causally linking partisan messages from media and political elites with growing mass polarization
                                                                                                                                         is tempting. Yet, there are also good theoretical reasons to expect that blatantly partisan messages
                                                                                                                                         will leave public opinion mostly unchanged—because citizens ignore them, resist them, or take
                                                                                                                                         them for granted.
                                                                                                                                             Empirical research on the inﬂuence of elite and media messages on mass political behavior faces
                                                                                                                                         formidable challenges, many related to the very technological changes that brought us Bill O’Reilly
                                                                                                                                         and The Hufﬁngton Post. Political scientists, communication scholars, and economists have begun
                                                                                                                                         to examine persuasion and selective exposure in the current high-choice media environment. This
                                                                                                                                         review summarizes existing evidence and concludes that empirical analysis is severely hampered
                                                                                                                                         by a seemingly simple problem: we do not know how many and what kind of people are exposed
                                                                                                                                         to which messages.
                                                                                                                                             The starting point for this account, documented in the next section, is evidence that Congress
                                                                                                                                         and some newer media outlets add more partisan messages to the continuing supply of mostly
                                                                                                                                         centrist news produced by many large outlets. Next, a review of public opinion research ﬁnds that
                                                                                                                                         the political attitudes of most Americans have remained fairly centrist, but signs of polarization
                                                                                                                                         emerge among the most politically involved. The remainder of this article evaluates evidence
                                                                                                                                         concerning the causal impact of a more partisan media environment on mass polarization. Compositional changes in the voting public link cable penetration and the polarization of elections
                                                                                                                                         even before the founding of Fox News and the creation of the World Wide Web. Yet, there is
                                                                                                                                         little evidence that more partisan messages changed people’s attitudes or behaviors. A key concept,
                                                                                                                                         discussed in detail here, is selective exposure. Evidence for partisan selective exposure is mixed
                                                                                                                                         and does not, on its own, show media impact. In this area in particular, measurement problems
                                                                                                                                         loom large, making it difﬁcult to quantify selectivity. As it is surprisingly difﬁcult to pinpoint how
                                                                                                                                         many people follow partisan news and for how long, a section of this article describes the cable
                                                                                                                                         news audience in some detail. The last section examines new research designs that consider the
                                                                                                                                         impact of partisan media on attitudes and voting behavior. The conclusion discusses the growing
                                                                                                                                         importance of news brands and social media, and ends by pointing out the need for more research
                                                                                                                                         on political activists and their use of partisan media.


                                                                                                                                         PARTISAN ELITES, PARTISAN MEDIA?
                                                                                                                                         It is easy to see why the claim of growing media inﬂuence resonates. Political elites have become
                                                                                                                                         more polarized, and some new voices on cable television and on the web offer ideologically
                                                                                                                                         slanted content. Among the less controversial propositions in this research area is the claim that
                                                                                                                                         partisan messages have become more common in the past quarter century. There is compelling
                                                                                                                                         evidence that the two parties in Congress oppose each other more often and more consistently.
                                                                                                                                         The percentage of roll-call votes in which a majority of one party opposes a majority of the other

                                                                                                                                  102    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                      ARI      7 April 2013     1:28


                                                                                                                            party has risen (e.g., Rohde 1991, Sinclair 2000). Interest groups rate members of Congress
                                                                                                                            as more ideologically split (e.g., Fleisher & Bond 2000). To the extent that the underlying
                                                                                                                            dimension of competition persistently reﬂects ideology, roll-call votes show growing ideological
                                                                                                                            divergence. Whereas several Republican members of Congress were ideologically more liberal
                                                                                                                            than the most conservative Democrats two or three decades ago, all Republicans are to the right


                                                                                                                            of all Democrats today (McCarty et al. 2006, Poole & Rosenthal 1997).
                                                                                                                                As for media content, there is no evidence that longstanding outlets have become more partisan.
                                                                                                                            Evening newscasts on the broadcast networks, long the most widely followed news source, are
                                                                                                                            mostly centrist with possibly a minor tilt in the liberal direction. A meta-analysis of about two dozen
                                                                                                                            content analyses ﬁnds a small but fairly consistent Democratic advantage on amount and tone of
                                                                                                                            presidential campaign coverage between 1968 and 1996 (D’Alessio & Allen 2000).1 Hamilton
                                                                                                                            (2004) shows that network news reﬂects the relatively liberal priorities of younger women because
                                                                                                                            they are most valued by advertisers and most indifferent about watching network news. Groeling
                                                                                                                            (2008) examines bias by comparing the circumstances in which newscasts reported presidential
                                                                                                                            approval ratings for Bill Clinton and George W. Bush measured by their own polls. Broadcast
                                                                                                                            networks were more likely to report a poll when it showed declining approval for President Bush
                                                                                                                            or increasing approval for President Clinton. Few content analyses of CNN exist for the period
                                                                                                                            when it was the only cable news network. One ﬁnds CNN campaign coverage to be mostly centrist
                                                                                                                            in 1992 and 1996 (Lowry & Shidler 1998).
                                                                                                                                Groseclose & Milyo (2005) propose a way to score media outlets and members of Congress
                                                                                                                            on the same ideological scale. They use the relative frequency of references to different think
                                                                                                                            tanks in news coverage and the Congressional Record to link outlets and legislators. The more
                                                                                                                            a news outlet refers to think tanks that are predominantly cited by liberal legislators, the more
                                                                                                                            liberal the news outlet is inferred to be. The advantage of Groseclose & Milyo’s method is that
                                                                                                                            researchers do not have to make subjective judgments about the slant of media coverage. The
                                                                                                                            disadvantage is that reliance on citation patterns makes assumptions that are poorly understood
                                                                                                                            (how do legislators and journalists pick which think tank to cite?) and not easy to implement (how
                                                                                                                            does one eliminate citations used only to criticize a think tank?). Gentzkow & Shapiro (2010)
                                                                                                                            employ a variation of the same approach that uses short word combinations as bridges between
                                                                                                                            newspapers and members of Congress, but they ﬁnd a notably different slant for the Wall Street
                                                                                                                            Journal. According to Groseclose & Milyo (2005), the news reporting of the Wall Street Journal is
                                                                                                                            more liberal than even the New York Times. In Gentzkow & Shapiro’s (2010) estimates, in contrast,
                                                                                                                            the Wall Street Journal is more conservative than the New York Times and almost as conservative
                                                                                                                            as the Washington Times. Gasper (2011) shows that Groseclose & Milyo’s estimates are not robust
                                                                                                                            to the deletion of one prominent think tank and that estimating slant over time generates strong
                                                                                                                            trends that are difﬁcult to explain. These inconsistencies cast some doubt on Groseclose & Milyo’s
                                                                                                                            (2005, p. 1,192) verdict of “strong liberal bias.”
                                                                                                                                The more important empirical ﬁnding that emerges consistently in these studies is that most
                                                                                                                            large media outlets are centrist compared to members of Congress. In 1999, only 3 out of 100
                                                                                                                            senators had ideological (Americans for Democratic Action) scores between 33 and 67 on a 0–
                                                                                                                            100 scale (Groseclose & Milyo 2005, p. 1,216). Yet 16 of 20 media outlets fall within this range
                                                                                                                            according to Groseclose & Milyo and 17 of 20 according to Gasper. Eighteen of 20 outlets have
                                                                                                                            ideological positions between Joe Lieberman and Susan Collins, who are among the most moderate
                                                                                                                              Not included in the meta-analysis is a recent study that ﬁnds evidence for Republican bias in visual presentation style of
                                                                                                                            network coverage of presidential elections from 1992 to 2004 (Grabe & Bucy 2009). For example, Republican candidates
                                                                                                                            received about the same amount of visual coverage as Democratic candidates but were shown from low camera angles more
                                                                                                                            frequently, which has been demonstrated to increase candidate evaluations.


                                                                                                                                                                                                www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   103


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                         senators (Groseclose & Milyo 2005, p. 1,228). One reason for centrism is that newspapers draw
                                                                                                                                         on many different reporters, thus introducing variation in slant within papers (Dalton et al. 1998,
                                                                                                                                         Shaw & Sparrow 1999).
                                                                                                                                             Groseclose & Milyo (2005), Gasper (2011), and Gentzkow & Shapiro (2010) all examine news
                                                                                                                                         reporting and exclude editorials. Ho & Quinn (2008) analyze newspaper editorials on Supreme


                                                                                                                                         Court decisions to compare ideology of newspapers and justices on the same scale. They ﬁnd only
                                                                                                                                         modestly less centrism. During the Rehnquist court, about half of all newspapers were located
                                                                                                                                         between Justices Kennedy and Breyer, the second- and third-most centrist justices at the time.
                                                                                                                                         Some papers take strongly ideological positions, however. The New York Times’ editorial stance is
                                                                                                                                         estimated to be more liberal than the most liberal justice, and the New York Post, Investor’s Business
                                                                                                                                         Daily, and the Washington Times are almost as conservative as Justice Scalia, the second-most conservative justice. Again, however, bundling generates moderation. In their content analysis of 41
                                                                                                                                         newspapers during the 1992 presidential campaign, Dalton et al. (1998) ﬁnd very low correlations
                                                                                                                                         between tone of editorials and news reporting.
                                                                                                                                             It is telling that the four most ideological papers according to Ho & Quinn (2008) either circulate nationally or in markets with multiple big papers. Most newspapers in the United States
                                                                                                                                         publish in one-paper markets and thus cater to an ideologically heterogeneous audience (see
                                                                                                                                         Gentzkow & Shapiro 2010, Hamilton 2004, Petrova 2011). Cable and Internet outlets that entered a crowded national market more recently have weaker economic incentives to aim for a
                                                                                                                                         politically moderate median user. Groeling (2008) ﬁnds that Special Report on the Fox News
                                                                                                                                         Channel (FNC) was disproportionately likely to report polls that showed declines in approval of
                                                                                                                                         President Clinton. Baum & Groeling (2008) show that http://www.DailyKos.com is much more
                                                                                                                                         likely to pick up wire stories favorable to Democrats, whereas http://www.FoxNews.com and
                                                                                                                                         http://www.FreeRepublic.com often avoid these stories and present pro-Republican content.
                                                                                                                                         When political blogs link to other blogs, they mostly pick ideologically congenial ones (Adamic
                                                                                                                                         & Glance 2005, Hargittai et al. 2008). Analyzing dozens of the most popular opinion formats on
                                                                                                                                         talk radio, cable, and blogs over a 10-week period in 2009, Sobieraj & Berry (2011) ﬁnd a heavy
                                                                                                                                         dose of insulting language, name calling, “very dramatic negative exaggeration,” and mockery.
                                                                                                                                         Cable and talk radio shows contain dozens of such instances of “outrage” per hour (for qualitative
                                                                                                                                         illustrations, see Jamieson & Cappella 2008). These smaller, more specialized, opinion-focused
                                                                                                                                         new media outlets provide the greatest opportunities for one-sided media exposure.
                                                                                                                                             In summary, most large US media outlets are politically centrist and provide a balance of
                                                                                                                                         competing viewpoints. But the ﬁrst condition for growing mass polarization through increasingly
                                                                                                                                         partisan media is partially met: some talk radio shows, cable news channels, and websites do offer
                                                                                                                                         more ideologically extreme packages of news and opinion. The next section examines the second
                                                                                                                                         condition: has the mass public become more politically polarized since more partisan media
                                                                                                                                         began to emerge?


                                                                                                                                         POLARIZATION AND PARTISANSHIP IN THE MASS PUBLIC
                                                                                                                                         In reviewing evidence for polarization and greater partisanship in the American public, it is important to distinguish between attitudes, perceptions, and behaviors. Voting in a more partisan
                                                                                                                                         way does not necessarily indicate stronger partisan attitudes if choices no longer include moderate
                                                                                                                                         options. Perceptions of rising polarization may reﬂect such evolving choices, without telling us
                                                                                                                                         much about the perceiver’s partisanship. Evidence for attitude polarization—individuals changing
                                                                                                                                         their issue positions, ideological convictions, or partisan sentiments to produce less centrist, more
                                                                                                                                         sharply opposed aggregate distributions of the most politically relevant attitudes—turns out to be
                                                                                                                                         ambiguous.

                                                                                                                                  104    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                     ARI    7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                Abundant evidence has emerged that Americans’ vote choices are more strongly related to
                                                                                                                            partisan considerations. Bartels (2000) shows that party identiﬁcation (ID) has become a better
                                                                                                                            predictor of vote decisions since the mid-1970s, and voters today are less likely to split their ticket
                                                                                                                            (Hetherington 2001, Mayer 1998). In the aggregate, stronger partisanship is seen in the resurging
                                                                                                                            correlation between the district-level presidential vote and the vote for the House candidate of


                                                                                                                            the president’s party (Fleisher & Bond 2004; Jacobson 2000, 2003). As a result of these trends, the
                                                                                                                            number of districts that elect a representative from one party but give a majority to the presidential
                                                                                                                            candidate of the opposite party has declined ( Jacobson 2003). The declining volatility of election
                                                                                                                            outcomes since the 1970s (Bartels 1998, pp. 295–97) is also consistent with stronger partisan
                                                                                                                            inﬂuence on voting decisions.
                                                                                                                                Fiorina (2002, Fiorina & Abrams 2008) has noted that these empirical patterns could be caused
                                                                                                                            by starker, more ideologically coherent parties and candidates alone. Democratic and Republican
                                                                                                                            elites have adopted positions on cultural issues that line up better with their established standpoints
                                                                                                                            on economic issues (Fiorina 2006, Layman & Carsey 2002a). As Republican and Democratic
                                                                                                                            alternatives have diverged from each other ideologically to offer voters a starker choice, an increase
                                                                                                                            in the impact of party ID could emerge even in the absence of changes among voters. It does not
                                                                                                                            necessarily mean individuals have become more partisan or assign greater importance to voting
                                                                                                                            in accordance with their party ID.
                                                                                                                                More Americans do in fact report that they see important differences between the parties
                                                                                                                            (Hetherington 2001; Prior 2007, p. 222). And on many political issues, more respondents are
                                                                                                                            able to place the Republican Party to the right of the Democratic Party than in previous decades
                                                                                                                            (Abramowitz & Saunders 1998, Layman & Carsey 2002a, Levendusky 2009b). Overall evaluations
                                                                                                                            of parties have diverged (e.g., Prior 2007, p. 222), and party identiﬁers rate the opposing party
                                                                                                                            increasingly negatively while not raising evaluations of their own party (Iyengar et al. 2012).
                                                                                                                            Rising out-group dislike may be expected as a reaction to elite divergence, but no causal link has
                                                                                                                            been demonstrated.
                                                                                                                                The notion that more partisan voting behavior is largely a result of a more partisan choice
                                                                                                                            set, not more partisan voters, receives support from the negative ﬁndings on attitude polarization.
                                                                                                                            DiMaggio et al. (1996) deﬁne four dimensions of polarization in the mass public: the dispersion of
                                                                                                                            attitudes, the extent to which attitudes cluster around two contrasting positions with few moderate
                                                                                                                            views in between, the link between different issue positions (“ideological polarization”), and the
                                                                                                                            existence of systematic differences between subpopulations (“identity-based polarization”). They
                                                                                                                            ﬁnd mostly convergence, not polarization, on the ﬁrst three dimensions. Many opinion distributions have become less dispersed and more centered on one middle position (see also Evans 2003).
                                                                                                                            On most issues, Americans take moderate positions, and their disagreement has not intensiﬁed
                                                                                                                            noticeably in recent decades (Fiorina 2006). Opinions of different demographic groups have in fact
                                                                                                                            grown more similar to an extent that leads DiMaggio et al. (1996, p. 738) to proclaim “dramatic
                                                                                                                            depolarization in intergroup differences.” Increases in issue constraint (Converse 1964)—taking
                                                                                                                            consistently liberal or conservative positions on sets of issues—have been minimal (Baldassarri
                                                                                                                            & Gelman 2008). In the electorate as a whole, people’s issue attitudes continue to be characterized better by three different dimensions than one left-right continuum (Layman & Carsey
                                                                                                                            2002b).
                                                                                                                                The belief systems of some Americans do appear to have changed in one way, however.
                                                                                                                            Democrats are increasingly likely to take liberal positions on salient issues and call themselves
                                                                                                                            liberal; Republicans, likewise, have become more conservative (e.g., Abramowitz & Saunders
                                                                                                                            1998, Layman & Carsey 2002a, Baldassarri & Gelman 2008, Stoker & Jennings 2008, Levendusky
                                                                                                                            2009b). A considerable amount of this supposed change is in fact measurement error (Carsey &
                                                                                                                            Layman 2006, Levendusky 2009a), but some people do exhibit stronger links than in the past

                                                                                                                                                                                    www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   105


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                         between issue positions and their party ID or ideology. This trend could emerge because people
                                                                                                                                         change their issue positions to make them consistent with their party ID or because people
                                                                                                                                         change their party ID to accord with their issue positions. If Republicans (or conservatives) and
                                                                                                                                         Democrats (or liberals) change at roughly the same rate, both processes leave the distribution
                                                                                                                                         of issue positions in the population unchanged but widen issue differences between Republicans


                                                                                                                                         and Democrats—the only kind of “identity-based polarization” that DiMaggio et al. (1996)
                                                                                                                                         observe.
                                                                                                                                             Of the two possible processes that generate a closer match of party ID and issue positions,
                                                                                                                                         changes in issue positions—what Layman & Carsey (2002b) call “party-based issue conversion” and Levendusky (2009b) refers to as “party-driven sorting”—appear to be more common
                                                                                                                                         (Levendusky 2009a,b), especially when the issue is not particularly important to the individual
                                                                                                                                         (Carsey & Layman 2006). This ﬁnding squares with the strong accumulated evidence that party
                                                                                                                                         ID is highly stable (e.g., Converse & Markus 1979, Green et al. 2002) and powerfully organizes
                                                                                                                                         many other components of people’s belief systems, including their core values (Goren 2005) and
                                                                                                                                         beliefs about objective conditions such as the crime rate or the state of the economy (Bartels
                                                                                                                                         2002).
                                                                                                                                             There are two notable exceptions to the prevalence of party-based sorting. In response to
                                                                                                                                         civil rights legislation, many Southern conservatives became dissatisﬁed with the increasingly
                                                                                                                                         liberal positions of the Democratic Party and became Republicans (Green et al. 2002, Levendusky
                                                                                                                                         2009b). Second, on the issue of abortion, people are more likely than on other issues to resolve
                                                                                                                                         inconsistencies by modifying their party identiﬁcation (Levendusky 2009b). Abortion is also the
                                                                                                                                         only issue on which DiMaggio et al. (1996, Evans 2003) found clear evidence of polarization, and
                                                                                                                                         even Fiorina (2006, pp. 88–90) shows sizable party differences.
                                                                                                                                             There is stronger evidence for attitude polarization among the most politically engaged,
                                                                                                                                         most partisan Americans. Among partisans, the correlation between the three main dimensions of issue attitudes (economic, cultural, racial) appears to have increased recently (Layman
                                                                                                                                         & Carsey 2002a,b). Layman & Carsey (2002b) use panel data to show that adjustments of party
                                                                                                                                         ID or issue positions occur only among those respondents who perceive elite-level issue differences. Other scholars have also found disproportionate polarization among more engaged
                                                                                                                                         segments of the electorate. The correlation between party ID and ideology is considerably
                                                                                                                                         higher for more politically knowledgeable individuals (Abramowitz & Saunders 2008, pp. 545–48;
                                                                                                                                         Hetherington 2009, p. 438). Evans (2003, pp. 80–81) ﬁnds that “the politically active are becoming more polarized—and particularly polarized on the most political of matters, feelings towards
                                                                                                                                         liberals and conservatives.” Baldassarri & Gelman (2008) ﬁnd some evidence for increasing belief
                                                                                                                                         consistency among politically interested Americans. Jacobson (2000, pp. 22–23) shows that the
                                                                                                                                         ideological distance between Republican and Democratic “activists” (the roughly 20% of House
                                                                                                                                         voters who report engaging in multiple political activities such as working for a candidate or donating money) has increased considerably more than the distance between partisan House voters
                                                                                                                                         who are not as engaged in the campaign.
                                                                                                                                             It is critically important to distinguish more partisan vote choice from more partisan political
                                                                                                                                         attitudes. As mentioned above, partisan elites offer a more ideologically coherent choice today than
                                                                                                                                         several decades ago, and there is clear evidence that people vote for their side more reliably, but
                                                                                                                                         there is little compelling evidence that this more partisan voting reﬂects more partisan attitudes,
                                                                                                                                         at least for the large majority of Americans. Having more ideologically coherent parties to choose
                                                                                                                                         from does not make you more partisan, just as buying tofu when the store is out of meat does not
                                                                                                                                         make you a vegetarian. Only among the politically engaged is evidence for attitude polarization
                                                                                                                                         somewhat stronger. The second condition for growing mass polarization through increasingly
                                                                                                                                         partisan media is thus met only for a minority of Americans, albeit an inﬂuential minority. But did

                                                                                                                                  106    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                     ARI    7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                            partisan media have anything to do with the sorting of engaged citizens into more ideologically
                                                                                                                            coherent blocs or the more partisan voting in the larger electorate?


                                                                                                                            POLARIZATION WITHOUT PERSUASION: MEDIA CHOICE
                                                                                                                            AND POLITICAL INVOLVEMENT


                                                                                                                            An important piece of empirical evidence complicates accounts in which mass polarization results
                                                                                                                            from more ideologically coherent partisan elites. One component of mass polarization, partisan
                                                                                                                            voting, increased as a function of cable penetration rates. A rise in the share of households with
                                                                                                                            cable television in a media market was followed by an increase in partisan voting, as measured by
                                                                                                                            the correspondence between presidential and House voting patterns in the media market or by
                                                                                                                            the correlation between consecutive presidential election results (Prior 2007, pp. 239–44). If more
                                                                                                                            partisan electoral behavior is caused by parties or candidates taking positions that are more consistently conservative or liberal, why does it occur at greater rates in areas with high cable penetration?
                                                                                                                                The relationship between cable access and partisan voting also poses a challenge for explanations that see more ideological media content as the cause of polarization. Cable access increased
                                                                                                                            the impact of partisanship in elections, but this relationship was ﬁrst observed in the 1970s, when
                                                                                                                            cable systems did not carry any news channels. Its impact strengthened in the 1980s, the decade
                                                                                                                            with the steepest growth in cable penetration. CNN began operating in 1980, but the emergence
                                                                                                                            of Fox News and MSNBC was still more than a decade away. How did cable television polarize
                                                                                                                            elections before the advent of slanted news?
                                                                                                                                Neither elite polarization nor media persuasion is necessary to explain how changes in the
                                                                                                                            media environment can generate more partisan voting behavior. The expansion of media choice
                                                                                                                            can polarize elections in the absence of any attitude change, reinforcement, and polarization.
                                                                                                                            In the 1960s and 1970s, the glory days of broadcast television, more people routinely watched
                                                                                                                            television news than in any other period. Compared to print media, broadcast television helped
                                                                                                                            less educated viewers learn more about politics. Even people with little interest in news and
                                                                                                                            politics watched network newscasts because they were glued to the set and there were no real
                                                                                                                            alternatives to news in many markets during the dinner hour. News exposure motivated some
                                                                                                                            of these less educated, less interested viewers to go to the polls. And because their political
                                                                                                                            views were not particularly ideological or partisan, their votes reduced the aggregate impact
                                                                                                                            of party ID, so elections were less partisan in the broadcast era (Prior 2007, pp. 37–91, 163–
                                                                                                                            213).
                                                                                                                                Beginning in the 1970s, the growth of cable television and later the Internet created an escape for this inadvertent and nonideological audience segment: more entertainment options that
                                                                                                                            were now easily available when broadcast networks offered newscasts. With greater media choice,
                                                                                                                            individual content preference became increasingly important in determining who would watch
                                                                                                                            the news and who would abandon it. Without their inadvertent news exposure, entertainment
                                                                                                                            fans lacked the occasional push to the polls. The turnout gap between news and entertainment
                                                                                                                            fans widened. And because entertainment fans are less partisan, their dropping turnout rates led
                                                                                                                            to more partisan elections. The stronger partisan preferences of remaining voters reduced the
                                                                                                                            volatility of election outcomes and raised the aggregate impact of partisanship. Greater media
                                                                                                                            choice polarized elections even before choices began to include more partisan news and opinion
                                                                                                                            formats (Prior 2007, pp. 94–138, 214–48).
                                                                                                                                If the goal was to ﬁnd a connection between media and more partisan elections, we can stop
                                                                                                                            looking. The culprit turns out to be not Fox News, but ESPN, HBO, and other early cable
                                                                                                                            channels that lured moderates away from the news—and away from the polls. Polarization
                                                                                                                            without persuasion—through technology-induced compositional change of the voting public and

                                                                                                                                                                                     www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   107


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                         elite-induced clariﬁcation of electoral choices—is sufﬁcient to explain why elections have become
                                                                                                                                         more partisan and moderates have all but disappeared in Congress. This explanation has the
                                                                                                                                         advantage of not requiring attitude polarization, for which evidence is weak, or media persuasion,
                                                                                                                                         which does not happen easily. But is it the whole story? Even if partisan media are not necessary
                                                                                                                                         to explain why elections have become more partisan, they may have exacerbated the trend or


                                                                                                                                         polarized attitudes.

                                                                                                                                         DO PARTISAN MEDIA INCREASE ATTITUDE POLARIZATION?
                                                                                                                                         Theories in political and cognitive psychology suggest several mechanisms to explain why exposure
                                                                                                                                         to partisan media might, or might not, lead to attitude polarization and more partisan voting
                                                                                                                                         behavior. One mechanism concerns the impact of exposure on attitudes: when a conservative, a
                                                                                                                                         moderate, and a liberal watch a conservative media outlet, what happens to their attitudes? A second
                                                                                                                                         mechanism covers the exposure stage: under what circumstances would a moderate or a liberal
                                                                                                                                         watch a conservative outlet in the ﬁrst place? The ﬁrst topic is often referred to as persuasion, the
                                                                                                                                         second as selective exposure. A voluminous literature has accumulated on both topics over more
                                                                                                                                         than half a century. This review focuses on studies that explicitly cover partisan messages.

                                                                                                                                         Persuasion: The Effect of Exposure on Attitudes
                                                                                                                                         In Zaller’s (1992, 1996) inﬂuential Receive-Accept-Sample (RAS) model of elite inﬂuence, whether
                                                                                                                                         a counter-attitudinal message changes a recipient’s attitude depends on the recipient’s political
                                                                                                                                         sophistication and her knowledge of the message source. Politically sophisticated recipients are
                                                                                                                                         less likely to be swayed by a counter-attitudinal message because they have a greater store of
                                                                                                                                         information that might contradict, and thus neutralize, the message. Recipients with knowledge
                                                                                                                                         of the message source are less likely to be swayed by a counter-attitudinal message because they
                                                                                                                                         question the credibility of the information.
                                                                                                                                             A moderate or liberal exposed to a conservative message could change her attitude in a conservative direction (if she holds no information to counter-argue the message and does not know
                                                                                                                                         the message source) or remain unmoved (if she counter-argues or dismisses the message based
                                                                                                                                         on source cues). Theories of motivated reasoning (Lodge & Taber 2000, Redlawsk 2002, Taber
                                                                                                                                         & Lodge 2006, Druckman et al. 2012), which emphasize affective and automatic processes, lead
                                                                                                                                         to similar predictions. Unlike the RAS model, motivated reasoning explicitly allows attitudes to
                                                                                                                                         change in the direction opposite the message, i.e., a conservative message can make a liberal’s
                                                                                                                                         attitude even more liberal. In the RAS model, this outcome occurs only stochastically through the
                                                                                                                                         “sampling” process.
                                                                                                                                             For a conservative exposed to a conservative message, Zaller’s RAS model predicts attitude
                                                                                                                                         moderation if the recipient’s initial attitude is more conservative than the message. In all other
                                                                                                                                         scenarios, attitudes of conservative recipients become more conservative or remain unchanged (if
                                                                                                                                         the recipient holds information that contradicts the message or if the recipient is already maximally
                                                                                                                                         conservative). Attitude polarization in response to partisan media exposure is thus a typical outcome
                                                                                                                                         in Zaller’s RAS model and theories of motivated reasoning. Recent work on media effects provides
                                                                                                                                         empirical examples (e.g., Arceneaux & Johnson 2010, Levendusky 2012b).
                                                                                                                                             Outcomes other than attitude polarization as a result of partisan news exposure are also theoretically plausible in the RAS model, however. Persuasion—acceptance of counter-attitudinal
                                                                                                                                         messages—arises in the RAS model when message recipients lack prior knowledge to counterargue the message and do not recognize its source. In the motivated reasoning framework, Taber
                                                                                                                                         & Lodge (2006, p. 756) caution that attitude polarization may not occur when a message fails to
                                                                                                                                         “arouse sufﬁcient partisan motivation to induce much biased processing.” Instead of polarizing

                                                                                                                                  108    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                     ARI    7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                            audience attitudes, slanted news may thus move everyone in the same direction, especially when
                                                                                                                            audience members lack political knowledge or strong prior attitudes. As Chong & Druckman
                                                                                                                            (e.g., 2007) demonstrate, the strength of arguments also affects the likelihood of persuasion.
                                                                                                                                Partisan media slant is not a necessary condition for attitude polarization either. In both the
                                                                                                                            RAS model and the motivated reasoning framework, exposure even to balanced or neutral news


                                                                                                                            can lead to attitude polarization (see also Lord et al. 1979). In the RAS model, this happens
                                                                                                                            when recipients can use source cues to differentiate conservative and liberal arguments within a
                                                                                                                            balanced newscast or when they reject counter-attitudinal arguments based on prior knowledge.
                                                                                                                            Zaller’s (1992, 1996) work provides many examples of attitude polarization during times when
                                                                                                                            slanted news was rare. In the motivated reasoning framework, balanced news can polarize attitudes
                                                                                                                            when ideological recipients dismiss and counter-argue attitude-inconsistent information while
                                                                                                                            embracing attitude-consistent information. This makes it empirically difﬁcult to distinguish the
                                                                                                                            impact of more partisan media from the impact of more polarized parties using balanced media
                                                                                                                            to convey information about their platforms.
                                                                                                                                In short, attitude polarization is one theoretically plausible, empirically demonstrated outcome
                                                                                                                            of media exposure—but not the only one. The impact of partisan media on those who follow them
                                                                                                                            depends in complex ways on their preexisting attitudes and political sophistication. Moreover, the
                                                                                                                            mechanisms of media inﬂuence discussed so far—attitude polarization and persuasion—presume
                                                                                                                            exposure. Yet, the proliferation of news outlets and platforms gives people greater control over
                                                                                                                            their media exposure and thus greater opportunity to avoid counter-attitudinal messages (Festinger
                                                                                                                            1957, Sears & Freedman 1967, Frey 1986). This points to a weakness in Zaller’s (1992, p. 139)
                                                                                                                            model: he rules out partisan selective exposure, stating, “It is the implicit assumption that a person’s
                                                                                                                            predispositions, although affecting acceptance of persuasive messages, do not affect reception.”
                                                                                                                            Motivated reasoning, in contrast, covers the possibility of partisan selectivity (e.g., Taber & Lodge
                                                                                                                            2006). In studies of motivated reasoning, messages are often attributed to politically unequivocal
                                                                                                                            sources (such as parties or candidates afﬁliated with parties). A growing number of studies aim
                                                                                                                            to gauge the extent of partisan selective exposure in the current high-choice media environment
                                                                                                                            where many centrist sources remain.


                                                                                                                            Partisan Selective Exposure
                                                                                                                            Several experimental studies have manipulated media source cues to document partisan selective
                                                                                                                            exposure. Iyengar & Hahn (2009) presented subjects with four news headlines. Randomly assigned,
                                                                                                                            some subjects also saw the logo of a news organization next to each headline (Fox News, NPR,
                                                                                                                            CNN, BBC). Among Republican participants, adding the Fox News logo to a headline increased
                                                                                                                            by about 25 percentage points the chance that participants would want to read the story. Adding
                                                                                                                            the CNN or NPR logo reduced the probability by close to 10 points. Among Democrats, the
                                                                                                                            effects were smaller, with a reduction in selection of just over 10 points when a headline was
                                                                                                                            labeled “Fox News.” [Messing & Westwood (2011) obtain very similar results.]
                                                                                                                                Unobtrusive observation can document selection behavior even in the absence of a control
                                                                                                                            group. Stroud (2011, pp. 67–73) offered people several news magazines while they were waiting
                                                                                                                            for the supposed beginning of a research study and observed their choices. Participants were
                                                                                                                            marginally more likely to read ideologically consistent magazines and select a free subscription
                                                                                                                            to ideologically consistent magazines at the end of the study. Iyengar et al. (2008) automatically
                                                                                                                            tracked use of a multimedia CD with material generated by the two presidential campaigns in 2000.
                                                                                                                            Study participants were signiﬁcantly more likely to look at content about personally relevant
                                                                                                                            issues. Strong Republicans and conservatives were more likely to access Bush content, but the
                                                                                                                            study generates no evidence for selective exposure among strong Democrats. Iyengar et al. (2008,

                                                                                                                                                                                     www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   109


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013    1:28


                                                                                                                                         p. 197) call the overall support for partisan selective exposure “modest” and conclude that “our
                                                                                                                                         participants’ exposure decisions were driven more by generic interest in politics and interest in
                                                                                                                                         particular issues, so there was plenty of exposure to potentially distasteful information.” Using
                                                                                                                                         a similar design, Kim (2009) also ﬁnds evidence that access to detailed candidate information
                                                                                                                                         promotes issue-based selective exposure (which reduces the impact of partisan considerations in


                                                                                                                                         candidate evaluations). In Graf & Aday’s (2008) study, student subjects spent more time reading
                                                                                                                                         online news about their preferred candidate or party but accessed counter-attitudinal stories on
                                                                                                                                         their preferred issues as well. In a disproportionately partisan sample (Garrett 2009a), subjects were
                                                                                                                                         more likely to express interest in reading news stories that they considered opinion-conﬁrming
                                                                                                                                         based on headline, source, and a short preview. However, their tendency to avoid stories expected
                                                                                                                                         to be opinion-challenging was only marginally signiﬁcant, and they spent as much time reading
                                                                                                                                         stories they expected to be opinion-challenging.
                                                                                                                                             Bennett & Iyengar (2008, p. 722) interpret the difference between the studies conducted in 2000
                                                                                                                                         (Iyengar et al. 2008) and 2006 (Iyengar & Hahn 2009) as a genuine trend toward more selective
                                                                                                                                         exposure. But an experiment conducted by Stroud (2011, pp. 73–77) in 2008 that resembles the
                                                                                                                                         Iyengar & Hahn design also found stronger evidence for issue-based selectivity than for partisan
                                                                                                                                         selectivity. Moreover, Bennett & Iyengar (2008) compare apples (selective exposure to different
                                                                                                                                         candidate-generated content attributed to political sources) and oranges (selective exposure to
                                                                                                                                         otherwise identical news headlines attributed to different media sources). It is not clear theoretically
                                                                                                                                         or empirically if selection operates in the same way in both contexts. Messing & Westwood (2011)
                                                                                                                                         extend the Iyengar & Hahn design by adding social endorsement cues (“10,000 people recommend
                                                                                                                                         this story”) next to the story headlines. These cues override the impact of source labels, leading
                                                                                                                                         people to select news from ideologically incongruent media outlets.
                                                                                                                                             There is some evidence, then, that some people, when given a choice between news reports
                                                                                                                                         with different (expected) partisan slant, gravitate toward like-minded news, but other selection
                                                                                                                                         criteria also operate and often override partisan consistency. It is possible that partisan selectivity
                                                                                                                                         varies at the individual level and depends on the task. In Valentino et al. (2009), subjects who were
                                                                                                                                         made to feel anxious about the 2004 presidential campaign sought counter-attitudinal candidate
                                                                                                                                         information more than those made to feel enthusiastic (unless subjects were told they would later
                                                                                                                                         have to defend their candidate preferences).
                                                                                                                                             Outside the experimental context, people face a choice of content over and over again. When
                                                                                                                                         choosing repeatedly, selective exposure might decline (Fischer et al. 2005), and even partisans
                                                                                                                                         may sometimes select a centrist or counter-attitudinal news source. In an experiment in which
                                                                                                                                         subjects chose twice between news stories that were distinguished only by randomly assigned
                                                                                                                                         source information, a substantial share of participants used their second choice to ideologically
                                                                                                                                         balance their ﬁrst one.2 In a more general criticism of experimental work, Iyengar et al. (2008,
                                                                                                                                         p. 187) note that “virtually all controlled research to date on selective exposure has relied on
                                                                                                                                         nonspontaneous or limited information search situations.”
                                                                                                                                             With respect to Internet use, the combination of automatic tracking with survey data on
                                                                                                                                         user ideology makes it possible to observe natural, “spontaneous” media use—although at
                                                                                                                                         the expense of control over the choice set. Analyzing comScore Internet tracking data for a
                                                                                                                                         sample of participants who are also interviewed to measure their ideology, Gentzkow & Shapiro
                                                                                                                                         (2011) ﬁnd weak evidence for partisan selectivity in online media use. Most of the largest
                                                                                                                                         news websites attract a similar amount of trafﬁc from conservative, moderate, and liberal users.
                                                                                                                                           This experiment was conducted under my supervision by Christopher Sykes for his senior thesis at Princeton in 2010. Iyengar
                                                                                                                                         & Hahn (2009) asked each subject to make six selection decisions. Their subjects did not actually see the selected content,
                                                                                                                                         however, and Iyengar & Hahn only report average treatment effects.


                                                                                                                                  110    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                    ARI     7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                            Thirty percent of daily visitors to http://www.nytimes.com are conservatives, for example,
                                                                                                                            as are 22% of visitors to http://www.huffingtonpost.com. Some websites do attract mostly
                                                                                                                            conservatives or mostly liberals. Three-quarters of daily http://www.foxnews.com visitors are
                                                                                                                            conservatives. Audiences for smaller opinion websites, such as http://www.billoreilly.com or
                                                                                                                            http://www.rushlimbaugh.com, are even more skewed ideologically.


                                                                                                                                Yet even if audiences for some small websites in the long tail are ideologically pure, most of
                                                                                                                            their users are not, and even ideologues tend to visit an ideologically diverse selection of websites. “Their omnivorousness outweighs their ideological extremity, preventing their overall news
                                                                                                                            diet from becoming too skewed” (Gentzkow & Shapiro 2011, p. 1,832). For example, 30% of
                                                                                                                            monthly visitors to http://www.rushlimbaugh.com also visit http://www.nytimes.com in the
                                                                                                                            same month, and 50% also visit Yahoo! News. A quarter of monthly http://www.dailykos.com
                                                                                                                            visitors also visit http://www.foxnews.com. Overall, Gentzkow & Shapiro (2011) estimate ideological segregation, which is conceptually similar to “de facto selectivity” (Sears & Freedman
                                                                                                                            1967, p. 197; see also Mutz & Young 2011), to be only slightly larger online than in the average
                                                                                                                            county and slightly smaller than in the average ZIP code.
                                                                                                                                Studies of selective exposure on television typically reach a very different conclusion: Republicans and conservatives report more exposure to conservative outlets, whereas Democrats and
                                                                                                                            liberals report greater exposure to liberal sources, so selective exposure in cable news viewing
                                                                                                                            is common (e.g., Coe et al. 2008, Hollander 2008, Jamieson & Cappella 2008, Garrett 2009b,
                                                                                                                            Stroud 2011, Holbert et al. 2012). Hollander (2008, p. 34), for example, argues that “Republicans
                                                                                                                            over time have shifted to such sources as Fox News, generally seen as friendly to their beliefs, and
                                                                                                                            away from news sources often named by conservative critics as unfriendly to their side, such as
                                                                                                                            CNN. . . . Democrats have done the same.” Stroud (2011, p. 54) concludes from her analysis of
                                                                                                                            survey data that “political beliefs seem to very much inﬂuence cable news network preferences.”
                                                                                                                            Jamieson & Cappella (2008, p. 81) write that “the audiences of the conservative media establishment are disposed to hold attitudes, opinions, and ideology that agree with these media sources.
                                                                                                                            The conservative media establishment is ‘preaching to the choir.’”
                                                                                                                                There are two plausible explanations for the divergence between these studies and Gentzkow
                                                                                                                            & Shapiro’s (2011) analysis of Internet use. Either cable viewers are in fact a lot more selective
                                                                                                                            in deciding which partisan slant to follow than Internet users, or a methodological difference
                                                                                                                            accounts for the results. Unlike Gentzkow & Shapiro, who examine Internet tracking data, the
                                                                                                                            cable news studies cited above all rely on media use self-reported by survey respondents. The next
                                                                                                                            section describes the cable news audience using automatic tracking data to understand if selectivity
                                                                                                                            in cable news viewing is as signiﬁcant as many survey-based studies indicate.


                                                                                                                            HOW MANY PEOPLE WATCH PARTISAN NEWS?
                                                                                                                            To properly assess the inﬂuence of partisan television, it is critical to know how many people watch
                                                                                                                            partisan media, for how long they watch, who they are, and what else they watch (or read or hear.)
                                                                                                                            The main source of tracking data for US television use is The Nielsen Company, which monitors
                                                                                                                            television viewing in a random sample of about 10,000 US households to derive proprietary
                                                                                                                            audience estimates (for more information about Nielsen’s methodology, see Prior 2009a; Napoli
                                                                                                                            2003, pp. 71–95). Detailed Nielsen estimates (let alone individual-level data) are not publicly
                                                                                                                            available, however, so characterizations of the cable news audience are patchy. A second source
                                                                                                                            of tracking data ( Jackman et al. 2012, LaCour 2012) relies on a different technology (cell phones
                                                                                                                            picking up radio and television sound, which can be matched against a database of programming)
                                                                                                                            and does offer individual-level data, but only covers the New York and Chicago media markets.
                                                                                                                            Jointly, these two data sources do help us understand the cable news audience better.

                                                                                                                                                                                   www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   111


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013    1:28


                                                                                                                                             Nielsen’s most easily available estimates of cable news viewing are ratings. Over most of the
                                                                                                                                         past decade, the Fox News Channel (FNC) has received the highest ratings of all cable news
                                                                                                                                         channels. Its average primetime audience in recent years has been around two million, or 0.7% of
                                                                                                                                         the population. The highest-rated hour on FNC (and all of cable news), The O’Reilly Report, attracts
                                                                                                                                         on average about three million viewers. The average primetime audience for FNC, CNN, and


                                                                                                                                         MSNBC combined is about 1.1% of the population (or 1.4% of adults) (Project for Excellence
                                                                                                                                         in Journalism 2012). Yet ratings give a somewhat misleading impression of the cable audience
                                                                                                                                         because they average over long portions of the day when most people are asleep or at work. Even
                                                                                                                                         the average audience for individual shows in primetime obscures the number of regular viewers
                                                                                                                                         because it only gives full weight to someone who watches the entire show every day it airs (see
                                                                                                                                         Prior 2007, pp. 151–55 for elaboration).
                                                                                                                                             A more relevant metric is the cumulative audience (also referred to as “reach” or “cume”). It is
                                                                                                                                         an estimate of the number of unique people who watch a particular program or channel for more
                                                                                                                                         than a certain number of minutes in a speciﬁed period. For example, 163 million people in the
                                                                                                                                         United States watched some or all of the Super Bowl in 2011, but the average minute was seen by
                                                                                                                                         only 111 million people (FOX 2011).
                                                                                                                                             Even though FNC has consistently attracted a greater average audience than CNN during the
                                                                                                                                         past decade, CNN has equally consistently had more unique viewers. In other words, the number
                                                                                                                                         of people who ever watch CNN exceeds the number who watch FNC, but FNC viewers tune
                                                                                                                                         in for longer periods of time than CNN viewers. The average monthly one-minute cumes have
                                                                                                                                         been around 100 million for CNN and 80 million for FNC in recent years (Project for Excellence
                                                                                                                                         in Journalism 2011). These numbers, too, are misleading because they include many cable news
                                                                                                                                         viewers who tune in extremely brieﬂy. A comparison of one-minute and six-minute cumes indicates
                                                                                                                                         that 35% of CNN viewers and 30% of FNC viewers watch less than ﬁve minutes per month.
                                                                                                                                         (Nielsen includes exposure to commercials, so these are essentially nonviewers.) According to
                                                                                                                                         six-minute cumes, about a quarter of the population watched CNN for at least six minutes per
                                                                                                                                         month between 2004 and 2009. For FNC, this share was about a ﬁfth. With a threshold of six
                                                                                                                                         minutes per month, these estimates include even the most sporadic viewers. For 2010, the Project
                                                                                                                                         for Excellence in Journalism also published estimates with a higher threshold, the monthly 60minute cume. An average of about 41.7 million viewers watched CNN for at least one hour per
                                                                                                                                         month, and another 14.4 million watched between six and 50 minutes. For FNC, the equivalent
                                                                                                                                         audiences were 41.0 million and 10.0 million, respectively.
                                                                                                                                             But even 60 minutes of exposure to a mix of cable news and commercials over the course of a
                                                                                                                                         month does not amount to a heavy dose of news. Monthly cumes with higher thresholds have not
                                                                                                                                         been published, but Stroud (2011, pp. 208–10) presents estimates for several two-week periods in
                                                                                                                                         2004 and 2008, and I obtained cume data for one week in March 2008. These data represent the
                                                                                                                                         best available information on the concentration of news viewing and the share of heavier news
                                                                                                                                         viewers.
                                                                                                                                             In April 2008, 22.7 million people watched FNC for at least an hour over a two-week period,
                                                                                                                                         and 17.8 million watched for at least two hours. And during the week of March 22, 13.5 million
                                                                                                                                         watched FNC for an hour or more. The ﬁrst estimate includes people who watch an average of
                                                                                                                                         just over four minutes of FNC programming and commercials per day, and even so, only 10%
                                                                                                                                         of the adult population is in this group.3 The second and third estimates amount to an average
                                                                                                                                          Stroud’s estimates are for the entire population (P2+). When expressing them as a percentage of the adult population (P18+),
                                                                                                                                         I thus assume that cable news viewing in the 2–17 age group is minimal, an assumption consistent with the typical age gradient
                                                                                                                                         of TV news consumption (see Prior 2009a, 2012). To the extent that the assumption is incorrect, the adult news audience is
                                                                                                                                         even smaller. Data for the week of March 22 are for P18+.


                                                                                                                                  112    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                     ARI     7 April 2013    1:28


                                                                                                                            daily minimum of 8.5 minutes per day, and only 6.1–7.9% of adults watch this much FNC. (That
                                                                                                                            the two-hour cume over two weeks is only slightly larger than the one-hour cume over one week
                                                                                                                            suggests that most of these heavier viewers regularly watch an hour or more per week.) These
                                                                                                                            magnitudes appear to be fairly typical. Stroud’s data for April and October 2004 show nearly
                                                                                                                            identical one- and two-hour cumes for FNC (one-hour: 22.5 million and 24.8 million viewers;


                                                                                                                            two-hour: 16.5 million and 18.8 million). CNN and MSNBC have smaller audiences at this level
                                                                                                                            of exposure. Sixty-minute cumes were 4.8% of adults for CNN and 3.8% for MSNBC in the week
                                                                                                                            of March 22, 2008.
                                                                                                                                In Stroud’s fourth observation period, October 2008—the ﬁnal month of the Obama-versusMcCain campaign in the midst of the economic collapse—FNC exposure was higher. The monthly
                                                                                                                            six-minute cume for October 2008 was 63 million, 16% higher than in March/April; the biweekly
                                                                                                                            60-minute cume was 28% higher and the biweekly 120-minute cume 26% higher. And the average
                                                                                                                            primetime audience for FNC nearly doubled between March/April and October 2008. Hence,
                                                                                                                            Fox News consumption increased sharply as Election Day 2008 approached partly because more
                                                                                                                            people tuned in but more because existing FNC viewers spent more time watching. The pattern
                                                                                                                            is even stronger for CNN and MSNBC. Primetime viewing more than doubled, but the share of
                                                                                                                            the population that watched at least brieﬂy increased at a lower rate.4
                                                                                                                                By any reasonable deﬁnition of heavy news viewing, then, audiences for FNC, CNN, and
                                                                                                                            MSNBC are small. The share of Americans who watch cable news at a rate of 10 minutes or
                                                                                                                            more per day is probably no larger than 10–15% of the voting-age population and rises modestly
                                                                                                                            when an exciting election approaches. Even this estimate may be high because adding up separate
                                                                                                                            cume estimates for each cable news channel amounts to double-counting people who watch more
                                                                                                                            than one channel. Data on the overlap between audiences for different news channels provide
                                                                                                                            additional information about the share of heavy viewers and the extent of selective exposure in
                                                                                                                            cable news viewing.

                                                                                                                            Do Fox News Viewers Tune Out the Other Side?
                                                                                                                            Because Nielsen does not measure the party ID or ideology of panelists, its data cannot reveal the
                                                                                                                            partisan composition of the audience. Yet audience overlap, the share of viewers of one channel
                                                                                                                            who also watch another, provides some insight into selective exposure. Minimal overlap between
                                                                                                                            audiences for conservative and liberal channels would correspond to strong selective exposure.
                                                                                                                                Tracking data on the overlap between audiences for different channels are rarely published.
                                                                                                                            Prior (2007, pp. 156–58) uses Nielsen data obtained by Webster (2005) for February 2003 and
                                                                                                                            reports strong signs of overlap: the average FNC viewer, deﬁned as anyone who watched at least
                                                                                                                            one minute per week, devoted 7.5% of her overall news consumption to FNC but another 6% to
                                                                                                                            other cable news channels. CNN viewers spent 4.7% of their viewing time watching CNN but
                                                                                                                            also 3.7% watching FNC. By using a one-minute weekly cume to deﬁne viewers of a channel at
                                                                                                                            a time when the imminent military intervention in Iraq was driving up news audience numbers
                                                                                                                            overall, these data effectively characterize average audience overlap in a sample that includes a few
                                                                                                                            heavy viewers and many more individuals who watched for only a few minutes.
                                                                                                                                Among heavier viewers, audience overlap appears to be less common. In Stroud’s (2011) data,
                                                                                                                            65% of people who watched FNC for an hour or more over two weeks also watched a mix of
                                                                                                                              Between March/April and October 2008, primetime viewing increased by 119% for CNN and 124% for MSNBC. The
                                                                                                                            six-minute monthly cume over the same period rose by 18% for CNN and 3% for MSNBC. The smaller rise in primetime
                                                                                                                            viewing in 2004 was also concentrated among existing viewers: primetime viewing increased by 25% for CNN, 53% for
                                                                                                                            MSNBC, and 60% for FNC. The six-minute monthly cume over the same period increased 15% for CNN, 8% for MSNBC,
                                                                                                                            and 19% for FNC.


                                                                                                                                                                                          www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   113


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                         CNN and MSNBC for at least 15 minutes during the same two weeks. But of FNC viewers who
                                                                                                                                         watched at least two hours, just 45% also watched the other cable news channels. These ratios are
                                                                                                                                         remarkably stable across the four periods for which Stroud presents data. They demonstrate that
                                                                                                                                         heavier FNC viewers are less likely to watch CNN or MSNBC at least brieﬂy. (The relationship
                                                                                                                                         between duration of exposure to CNN or MSNBC and avoiding FNC may be somewhat weaker.)


                                                                                                                                             Overlap is less frequent yet when it is deﬁned as watching two channels for at least an hour per
                                                                                                                                         week each. Of those who watched at least an hour of FNC in the week of March 22, 2008, only
                                                                                                                                         16% also watched at least an hour of CNN and 13% at least an hour of MSNBC. Only 20% of
                                                                                                                                         those who watched CNN for at least an hour, and 21% of those who watched MSNBC for at least
                                                                                                                                         an hour, also watched FNC for an hour or more. When the six-minute cume is used instead to
                                                                                                                                         examine a larger but less intense news audience, overlap increases. Of those who watched at least
                                                                                                                                         six minutes of FNC, 42% also watched at least six minutes of CNN and 33% at least six minutes
                                                                                                                                         of MSNBC.
                                                                                                                                             There are thus clear signs of selective exposure among some heavy cable news viewers. It is
                                                                                                                                         important to note, however, that this is a small group. Only 5% of the adult population watched an
                                                                                                                                         hour or more of FNC in the week of March 22, 2008 but less than an hour of CNN. Because this
                                                                                                                                         ﬁgure does not consider MSNBC exposure, it likely overstates selective exposure. LaCour’s (2012)
                                                                                                                                         analysis of news exposure in the New York and Chicago media markets in the 12 weeks before
                                                                                                                                         the 2006 midterm elections includes exposure to other partisan television and radio programs.
                                                                                                                                         Only 7% of his sample devoted 80% or more of their news exposure to one side. All but the most
                                                                                                                                         selective cable news viewers tend to watch a lot of (ideologically heterogeneous, often neutral)
                                                                                                                                         local news.
                                                                                                                                             The data used by LaCour (2012) have another advantage over Nielsen because they include
                                                                                                                                         the partisan afﬁliation of their panelists. LaCour can therefore examine selective exposure more
                                                                                                                                         directly by comparing news exposure of Democrats and Republicans. On average, Democrats
                                                                                                                                         selected 23% liberal news and 10% conservative news. For Republicans, 22% of media use was
                                                                                                                                         devoted to conservative news and 15% to liberal news. The large majority of partisans followed
                                                                                                                                         mostly local news. Like-minded exposure exceeded 80% of total news exposure among only 4%
                                                                                                                                         of partisans.
                                                                                                                                             Automatic tracking of television viewing using two different technologies reveals that most
                                                                                                                                         people avoid cable news almost entirely. A large segment watches cable news infrequently and
                                                                                                                                         nonselectively, mixing exposure to different cable news channels. In the small slice of heavy cable
                                                                                                                                         news viewers, however, partisan selective exposure is not uncommon.


                                                                                                                                         Measurement Error and Partisan Selective Exposure
                                                                                                                                         Because asking people about their news exposure in surveys is a lot cheaper than tracking their
                                                                                                                                         viewing automatically, a question of critical importance for designing future research is whether
                                                                                                                                         survey-based self-reports can accurately categorize respondents as nonviewers, nonselective casual
                                                                                                                                         viewers, nonselective heavy viewers, or selective heavy viewers. Existing research indicates that
                                                                                                                                         many self-reports of media use are not very accurate. Low validity has been shown for self-reported
                                                                                                                                         exposure to network news (Prior 2009a), all television news (LaCour 2012), and presidential
                                                                                                                                         debates (Prior 2012). The main cause of inaccurate self-reports appears to be the failure to recall
                                                                                                                                         exposure in any detail. Asked to report it anyway, survey respondents give inaccurate estimates
                                                                                                                                         that often inﬂate their actual exposure (Prior 2009b). If anything, theories of motivated reasoning
                                                                                                                                         heighten validity concerns for exposure to partisan media: taking self-reports at face value requires
                                                                                                                                         the assumption that the very people who follow their wishful thinking when they evaluate economic
                                                                                                                                         performance (see Bartels 2002) or perceive centrist news as biased (see Dalton et al. 1998, Vallone

                                                                                                                                  114    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                      ARI      7 April 2013     1:28


                                                                                                                            et al. 1985) faithfully report when they turn off the pro-attitudinal message stream or follow
                                                                                                                            counter-attitudinal programming. If instead partisans forget, underestimate, or fail to admit their
                                                                                                                            exposure to “the other side,” but are happy to report following “their side,” self-reports will
                                                                                                                            exaggerate the extent of selective exposure.
                                                                                                                                To compare automatic tracking results to survey-based estimates, I draw on two surveys conducted in the ﬁrst half of 2008. The Media Consumption Survey conducted biannually by the Pew
                                                                                                                            Research Center for the People and the Press is arguably the most detailed and thorough survey
                                                                                                                            on news media use. The 2008 Media Consumption Survey (n = 3,615) was conducted by phone
                                                                                                                            between April 30 and June 1. The survey used random-digit dialing and included cell phone users
                                                                                                                            in its sample. The second survey was conducted by Knowledge Networks (KN) between March 26
                                                                                                                            and April 8, 2008 (n = 1,583). Respondents constitute a randomly selected subset of KN’s larger
                                                                                                                            panel, which is recruited through probability sampling. (Like Nielsen estimates, both surveys use
                                                                                                                            demographic post-stratiﬁcation weights.)
                                                                                                                                Self-reports exaggerate the size of the cable news audience. In the Pew survey, 52% of Americans aged eighteen and older reported watching Fox News “regularly” or “sometimes.” In the KN
                                                                                                                            survey, 55% did. The share of self-proclaimed “regular” Fox News viewers was 24% according
                                                                                                                            to Pew and 22% in the KN survey.5 The vague response options in these and most other survey
                                                                                                                            questions about cable news exposure prevent an exact comparison to Nielsen estimates. But no
                                                                                                                            matter which cume threshold is used, Nielsen’s estimates are much smaller, indicating considerable overreporting in surveys. Only 6–8% of Americans watched at least 60 minutes of FNC
                                                                                                                            per week in March/April 2008, but three to four times as many called themselves regular viewers
                                                                                                                            of the news channel. Even if we deﬁne a regular viewer as anyone who watches more than ﬁve
                                                                                                                            minutes per week, which is surely too lenient a deﬁnition, survey estimates are still twice as high as
                                                                                                                            Nielsen estimates. One would have to implausibly treat six minutes of exposure per month as regular
                                                                                                                            viewing in order to achieve rough correspondence between self-reports and Nielsen estimates.
                                                                                                                                Overreporting of exposure to CNN and MSNBC is similar in magnitude. Fewer than 4% of
                                                                                                                            American adults watched an hour of MSNBC or more in a week, but three times as many called
                                                                                                                            themselves regular viewers. The 60-minute cume for CNN was 4.8%, compared to 18% “regular”
                                                                                                                            CNN viewers, averaged across the two surveys.
                                                                                                                                If audience estimates based on automatic tracking are so much smaller than estimates that
                                                                                                                            rely on self-reports, conclusions drawn from survey data about audience overlap should also raise
                                                                                                                            suspicion. Figure 1 presents estimates of audience overlap between FNC and MSNBC in Nielsen
                                                                                                                            data, the Pew survey, and the KN survey. The ﬁgure illustrates the general mismatch between
                                                                                                                            self-reports and Nielsen estimates. Self-reports, especially those that include “sometimes” viewers,
                                                                                                                            produce dramatically higher estimates of audience size and amount of overlap. Of survey respondents who report watching FNC at least “sometimes,” 57% (KN) and 58% (Pew) also report
                                                                                                                            “sometimes” or “regularly” watching MSNBC. By comparison, only 33% of people who watch at
                                                                                                                            least six minutes of FNC per week also watch six minutes or more of MSNBC. The mismatch is
                                                                                                                            slightly greater for overlap between FNC and CNN.
                                                                                                                                Audience overlap is lower among self-reported regular viewers. Only 22% (KN) or 25% (Pew)
                                                                                                                            of “regular” FNC viewers also watch MSNBC “regularly.” Both survey and tracking estimates
                                                                                                                              Pew uses the following question wording: “Now I’d like to know how often you watch or listen to certain TV and radio
                                                                                                                            programs. For each that I read, tell me if you watch or listen to it regularly, sometimes, hardly ever, or never. How often
                                                                                                                            do you watch [program or channel]?” The exposure questions in the KN survey were designed to match the Pew format.
                                                                                                                            Respondents were randomly assigned to a series of questions about either cable news channels or cable news programs. The
                                                                                                                            top of the survey screens read, “How often do you watch each of these cable news channels [programs]?” The response options
                                                                                                                            were the same as in the Pew survey.


                                                                                                                                                                                               www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   115


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                                    Nielsen: 60-minute cume                     Nielsen: 6-minute cume
                                                                                                                                                                  5.3 3                                       8.5
                                                                                                                                                                         0.8                                                        FNC only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MSNBC only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Both


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Neither


                                                                                                                                                    90.9                                       80.6

                                                                                                                                                     Pew: “regular” viewers            Pew: “regular” and “sometimes” viewers

                                                                                                                                                                         18.2                                        21.9

                                                                                                                                                                                        33.1
                                                                                                                                                                                6.1                                          15.3


                                                                                                                                                    67.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                      29.7

                                                                                                                                                     KN: “regular” viewers             KN: “regular” and “sometimes” viewers

                                                                                                                                                                         16.9                                        23.5
                                                                                                                                                                                5.3

                                                                                                                                                                                 4.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7.5


                                                                                                                                                    72.9                                                             31

                                                                                                                                         Figure 1
                                                                                                                                         Audience overlap between Fox News Channel and MSNBC. Each graph divides the American public into
                                                                                                                                         those who do not watch either channel, those who watch both, and those who watch only one of the two.
                                                                                                                                         Graphs on the right include anyone who watched at least six minutes of a channel (for Nielsen data) or
                                                                                                                                         reported watching a channel at least “sometimes” (for survey data). Graphs on the left include only those
                                                                                                                                         who watched at least an hour (Nielsen) or call themselves “regular” viewers (Pew and KN).


                                                                                                                                         thus show a reduction in audience overlap with a higher threshold. But the FNC-MSNBC overlap
                                                                                                                                         among “regular” viewers in surveys is still almost twice as high as the 13% overlap among heavy
                                                                                                                                         viewers according to Nielsen. And the FNC-CNN overlap is 31–33% among “regular” viewers
                                                                                                                                         in the surveys but only 16% according to Nielsen’s 60-minute cume.
                                                                                                                                             Even the desperate argument that survey data for “regular” viewers seem close enough to
                                                                                                                                         Nielsen’s six-minute cume does not go far. First, the match is not all that close: the exclusive

                                                                                                                                  116    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                     ARI    7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                            audience for FNC exceeds the full MSNBC audience according to self-reports of “regular” viewing
                                                                                                                            (17.5% versus 11% across the two surveys), but the reverse is true according to Nielsen’s six-minute
                                                                                                                            cume (8.5% versus 10.9%). Second, equating “regular” viewing with a six-minute cume amounts
                                                                                                                            to arguing that one minute of viewing per day constitutes “regular” viewing.
                                                                                                                                The principal defect of surveys in gauging audience overlap has its roots in the overreporting


                                                                                                                            problem. The number of self-proclaimed “regular” viewers is at least three times that revealed by
                                                                                                                            automatic tracking—and that’s when we generously deﬁne regular viewing as one hour per week,
                                                                                                                            or about eight minutes per day. So many respondents claim “regular” exposure to cable channels
                                                                                                                            that it is not possible to isolate the respondents who in fact did watch a lot of news. As a result,
                                                                                                                            surveys fail to distinguish nonselective casual viewers from more selective heavy viewers. According
                                                                                                                            to self-reports, many Americans regularly watch a heavy mix of different news channels. In stark
                                                                                                                            contrast, automatic viewer tracking indicates that a large majority of Americans tune out all cable
                                                                                                                            news. But among the heaviest cable news viewers, selective exposure is common. Self-reported
                                                                                                                            cable news exposure fails to distinguish the many occasional viewers with a mostly bipartisan news
                                                                                                                            diet from the few partisan viewers who typically follow one side only. Lumping the two groups
                                                                                                                            together thwarts efforts to understand the extent and consequence of selective exposure.
                                                                                                                                Low validity of self-reports threatens more than descriptive analyses of news exposure. Research
                                                                                                                            examining the association of self-reported partisan news exposure with political outcomes such as
                                                                                                                            political beliefs ( Jamieson & Cappella 2008, Feldman et al. 2012), political participation (Dilliplane
                                                                                                                            2011), candidate evaluations (Morris & Francia 2010), or voting behavior (Stroud 2011) is difﬁcult
                                                                                                                            to interpret because the self-reports reﬂect an unknown mixture of political interest, ideological
                                                                                                                            self-image, recall error, and presumably true exposure. Future research on selective exposure and
                                                                                                                            the political impact of partisan media should avoid self-reported media use until we have a properly
                                                                                                                            validated survey-based measure of exposure.


                                                                                                                            DO PARTISAN MEDIA CHANGE MINDS?
                                                                                                                            One strategy to get around the low validity of self-reported news exposure is to assign news
                                                                                                                            exposure as an experimental treatment. Experimental control is a great beneﬁt if the goal is to
                                                                                                                            demonstrate the potential for media messages to cause change. But to estimate how often a media
                                                                                                                            effect observed experimentally can be expected to occur under natural conditions, researchers still
                                                                                                                            need information about likely viewing patterns. In the most extreme case, experimental results occur only among subjects who never experience the treatment naturally—making the experimental
                                                                                                                            effect entirely counterfactual.
                                                                                                                                In a compelling experimental design, Arceneaux & Johnson (2007, 2010, Arceneaux et al. 2012)
                                                                                                                            offer subjects a selection of programs and a remote control to change channels. Instead of asking
                                                                                                                            subjects to self-report their news exposure, it is automatically measured as part of the research. In
                                                                                                                            one study (Arceneaux & Johnson 2010), the choices are a FNC segment, an MSNBC segment, and
                                                                                                                            two different entertainment programs. The design allows subjects to select into their preferred
                                                                                                                            cable news option or to tune out news coverage altogether. A precursor of this design showed that
                                                                                                                            many survey respondents would pick news only when other viewing options were unavailable, but
                                                                                                                            the experiment did not distinguish between different cable news channels (Prior 2007, pp. 34–47).
                                                                                                                            Arceneaux & Johnson’s experiment approximates the impact of cable news outside the lab more
                                                                                                                            closely than traditional experimental designs that treat all subjects. Comparing treatment effects
                                                                                                                            in a traditional design without selection to treatment effects with selection allows Arceneaux &
                                                                                                                            Johnson to quantify the counterfactual portion of the effect.
                                                                                                                                A different experimental design exposes all subjects to treatment or control but assesses the
                                                                                                                            probability of treatment outside the research context. Levendusky (2012b) asks subjects which of

                                                                                                                                                                                    www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   117


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                         three types of news (e.g., “a show from Fox News like The O’Reilly Factor”) they would “most like
                                                                                                                                         to watch” before exposing them to a randomly chosen clip from one of those three programs.
                                                                                                                                         Treatment effect can then be estimated conditional on expressed preferences. [Arceneaux et al.
                                                                                                                                         (2012) also use this design.]
                                                                                                                                             Initial ﬁndings from this work appear somewhat inconsistent. Arceneaux & Johnson (2010,


                                                                                                                                         Arceneaux et al. 2012) generally ﬁnd less or no evidence for partisan polarization among participants who select the political treatment. Levendusky (2012a,b), on the other hand, tends to
                                                                                                                                         ﬁnd stronger polarizing effects of like-minded exposure among subjects who prefer the neutral or
                                                                                                                                         like-minded clips than among subjects who prefer the counter-attitudinal clip.
                                                                                                                                             Experimental designs that integrate selection are an important methodological advance, but
                                                                                                                                         they do not resolve the measurement dilemma. In Levendusky’s design, subjects still self-report
                                                                                                                                         their hypothetical viewing decisions. Instead of asking subjects about their exposure, Arceneaux &
                                                                                                                                         Johnson observe subjects’ choice—but the selection is much simpliﬁed. In Arceneaux & Johnson’s
                                                                                                                                         (2010) study, the entertainment choices are The Dog Whisperer and a show on the Travel Channel.
                                                                                                                                         These options will screen out the most ardent entertainment fans, but a large portion of viewing
                                                                                                                                         in the choice condition is still devoted to cable news (62% in one study, 43% in another). The
                                                                                                                                         design could be improved by offering a greater variety of entertainment options and a centrist news
                                                                                                                                         option to lower observed cable news exposure to a more realistic 10–20% of overall viewing—but
                                                                                                                                         only at the price of reducing its statistical power. [In a related design, Druckman et al. (2012)
                                                                                                                                         allow subjects to choose from 35 news articles, but they do not aim to isolate the impact of each
                                                                                                                                         article.] The same limitation appears in Levendusky’s design in a different variation: the choice set
                                                                                                                                         he offers to participants does not include any entertainment options. Half of the sample indicates a
                                                                                                                                         preference for PBS news; one-third prefers like-minded news. This distribution of viewing choices
                                                                                                                                         is even less representative of the real world than the distorted view we get from self-reports of
                                                                                                                                         exposure. The experiments by Arceneaux & Johnson and Levendusky measure effects of exposure
                                                                                                                                         to partisan media among subjects who select into the treatment, but the results remain conditional
                                                                                                                                         on a highly stylized choice set in the selection stage.
                                                                                                                                             Field or natural experiments are the second design that does not require exposure measurement.
                                                                                                                                         DellaVigna & Kaplan (2007) exploit variation in the timing of cable companies’ decisions to carry
                                                                                                                                         FNC after it became available in 1996. They estimate that availability of FNC increased the
                                                                                                                                         Republican vote share in the 2000 presidential election by about 0.4 to 0.7 percentage points.
                                                                                                                                         The effect of FNC on Republican vote share and on turnout was larger in Democratic districts,
                                                                                                                                         according to DellaVigna & Kaplan (2007), but their analysis cannot determine if this reﬂects
                                                                                                                                         conversion of Democrats or disproportionate mobilization or reinforcement of Republicans who
                                                                                                                                         live in areas with predominantly Democratic populations. A recent working paper by Hopkins &
                                                                                                                                         Ladd (2012), which uses the same identiﬁcation strategy combined with survey data, concludes that
                                                                                                                                         stronger support for candidate George W. Bush among Republicans and Independents accounts
                                                                                                                                         for the effect of FNC.
                                                                                                                                             In a ﬁeld experiment, Gerber et al. (2009) randomly assigned residents of the Washington, DC
                                                                                                                                         area who were not already subscribers to receive subscriptions to either the Washington Post or the
                                                                                                                                         Washington Times in the weeks before the 2006 midterm elections. Compared to a control group,
                                                                                                                                         both treatments increased support for Democrats (although only the Post did so by a statistically
                                                                                                                                         signiﬁcant margin). That the conservative Washington Times failed to raise support for Republicans
                                                                                                                                         cautions against simple stimulus-response theories of partisan media. In one way, this design, too,
                                                                                                                                         captures a counterfactual: it estimates the treatment effect of partisan media on individuals who
                                                                                                                                         had previously decided not to select into the audience. The treatment effect among subscribers
                                                                                                                                         may be different.


                                                                                                                                  118    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                      ARI      7 April 2013     1:28


                                                                                                                               A limitation of ﬁeld and natural experiments is their inability to link the observed effects to
                                                                                                                            media use. In Gerber et al.’s study, did the Washington Times fail to move subjects in a conservative
                                                                                                                            direction because they ignored the paper, because they read the news coverage but not the opinion
                                                                                                                            pages, or because they resisted the partisan slant? Did the Times crowd out natural news exposure
                                                                                                                            or encourage more of it? Likewise, DellaVigna & Kaplan are forced to rely on self-reported news


                                                                                                                            exposure to understand how availability of FNC caused an increase in the Republican vote margin.
                                                                                                                            Their comparison of viewing diaries and survey self-reports for February 2000 to August 2001
                                                                                                                            (both collected by Scarborough Research) shows less widespread FNC exposure and a higher ratio
                                                                                                                            of Republican to Democratic FNC viewers in the diary data (DellaVigna & Kaplan 2007). In the
                                                                                                                            diary data, 3.5% of respondents recorded at least one half-hour period of FNC exposure in a
                                                                                                                            week. In the survey data, 16.6% reported watching at least some FNC in the past week. With
                                                                                                                            this large range of estimates, calculations of “the share of the audience that was convinced by Fox
                                                                                                                            News to vote Republican” (DellaVigna & Kaplan 2007, pp. 1217–26) vary widely: between 3%
                                                                                                                            and 28%, assuming no selective exposure. Allowing for selective exposure (which is evident in
                                                                                                                            DellaVigna & Kaplan’s own media use data), persuasion rates would rise (because they imply a
                                                                                                                            smaller share of non-Republican viewers and thus a greater ratio of additional non-Republican
                                                                                                                            votes to non-Republican viewers).
                                                                                                                               The studies discussed in this section are among the most advanced attempts to understand the
                                                                                                                            impact of partisan media. They illustrate that impact can be signiﬁcant (e.g., FNC in 2000) but is
                                                                                                                            not automatic (Washington Times in 2006). Allowing subjects to decide how much, if any, partisan
                                                                                                                            media they want to watch as part of an experiment is an important innovation. But the pioneering
                                                                                                                            studies still led too many people to select partisan news who would hardly ever watch it outside
                                                                                                                            the lab.


                                                                                                                            CONCLUSION
                                                                                                                            In the 1970s, about a quarter of Americans identiﬁed strongly with a political party. Media in the
                                                                                                                            broadcast era were probably too centrist for these people’s tastes. Technological change has made
                                                                                                                            it economically viable to cater to smaller audience segments.6 Nobody should be surprised that
                                                                                                                            some strong partisans turned to more ideologically congruous media formats when they became
                                                                                                                            available. But that audience migration alone does not constitute evidence that partisan media
                                                                                                                            polarize Americans. The difference between the media-catching-up-with-partisan-fringes view
                                                                                                                            and the media-pushing-Americans-to-partisan-extremes account is large and of critical importance
                                                                                                                            for the trajectory of American politics in a high-choice media environment. Research to date does
                                                                                                                            not offer compelling evidence that partisan media have made Americans more partisan. Most voters
                                                                                                                            are centrist. Most voters avoid partisan media altogether or mix and match across ideological lines.
                                                                                                                            And those who follow partisan media closely and select mostly one side are already partisan.


                                                                                                                            Beyond Selective Exposure
                                                                                                                            The current focus on selective exposure creates the impression that partisan selection of news is the
                                                                                                                            critical determinant of whether media polarize citizens. It is not. Partisan selective exposure is only
                                                                                                                              Policy changes contributed as well. Talk radio, today a predominantly conservative platform, beneﬁted from the end of the
                                                                                                                            Fairness Doctrine in 1987, the relaxation of constraints on ownership in 1996, and technological advances that shifted music
                                                                                                                            listening away from radio (Berry & Sobieraj 2011).


                                                                                                                                                                                                www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   119


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                         one step in a chain of processes that may link partisan media and attitude polarization. For a large
                                                                                                                                         number of Americans, the choice between partisan and centrist media rarely arises—they avoid
                                                                                                                                         news altogether (Prior 2007). For many others, selective exposure is only one of several cognitive
                                                                                                                                         mechanisms to resist attitude-inconsistent information. As information processing theories such as
                                                                                                                                         Zaller’s (1992) RAS model and motivated reasoning (Lodge & Taber 2000) make clear, exposure


                                                                                                                                         to an attitude-inconsistent message does not imply that the receiver’s attitude will change in the
                                                                                                                                         direction of the message. People often spend considerable time thinking about counter-attitudinal
                                                                                                                                         messages without accepting them (Redlawsk 2002, Meffert et al. 2006, Taber & Lodge 2006);
                                                                                                                                         instead, they rehearse reasons to resist the messages (as predicted by Festinger 1964). Even when
                                                                                                                                         they do not engage in partisan selective exposure, partisans often defend their beliefs and attitudes
                                                                                                                                         by other means. Selective processing and counter-arguing of partisan messages deserve at least as
                                                                                                                                         much attention as selective exposure.
                                                                                                                                             Attitude preservation is less common when the attitude-inconsistent information is useful (Hart
                                                                                                                                         et al. 2009), when there is a lot of attitude-inconsistent information (Redlawsk et al. 2010), and
                                                                                                                                         when a policy proposal has some (but not overwhelming) support in both parties (Druckman et al.
                                                                                                                                         2013). On new issues, motivated reasoning is less likely to occur (Druckman & Bolsen 2011).
                                                                                                                                         Under these conditions, either the expected dissonance reduction from considering the other side
                                                                                                                                         is small or accuracy goals supersede motivated reasoning. Gerber et al.’s (2009) ﬁeld experiment
                                                                                                                                         appears to illustrate the limits of motivated reasoning: in a political environment favorable to
                                                                                                                                         Democrats, even a clearly conservative newspaper such as the Washington Times (Ho & Quinn
                                                                                                                                         2008, Gentzkow & Shapiro 2010) did not help the Republican Party.
                                                                                                                                             Selective exposure matters because it affects who encounters partisan messages under what
                                                                                                                                         conditions. In light of the low validity of self-reported exposure, researchers would do well to
                                                                                                                                         observe selection directly. More work on selective exposure is thus necessary not for its own sake,
                                                                                                                                         but as a component of modern persuasion research. Arceneaux & Johnson (2007, 2010) have
                                                                                                                                         introduced an experimental design that integrates exposure and message processing. The coming
                                                                                                                                         years will almost surely see a rush to reﬁne and extend their approach. Following Valentino et al.
                                                                                                                                         (2009), researchers should investigate the conditions under which individuals are motivated to
                                                                                                                                         seek conﬁrmatory information. Observational data on media use may average situations where
                                                                                                                                         the same individuals vary in partisan selectivity.


                                                                                                                                         News Brands and Social Media
                                                                                                                                         The psychology of selecting media content is tightly linked to the economy of media brands
                                                                                                                                         and the technology of media platforms. News stories are experience goods, as users discover
                                                                                                                                         their properties only upon exposure. This feature encourages news producers to create brands
                                                                                                                                         which communicate to potential viewers what to expect (Hamilton 2004, Gentzkow & Shapiro
                                                                                                                                         2006). Iyengar & Hahn (2009) found that Republicans picked FNC even for travel and sports
                                                                                                                                         coverage. To Mutz & Young (2011), this ﬁnding suggests that some viewers select FNC out of
                                                                                                                                         habit or a sustained preference for presentation style, not to avoid counter-attitudinal political
                                                                                                                                         programming. Gentzkow & Shapiro (2006) show that people tend to view an attitude-consistent
                                                                                                                                         news brand as more believable, which induces news producers to bias their content in the direction
                                                                                                                                         of their audience in order to sustain the appeal of their brand. Both of these plausible mechanisms
                                                                                                                                         generate patterns that look like partisan selectivity even though users do not seek to tune out
                                                                                                                                         attitude-inconsistent content.
                                                                                                                                             Future work on the origins and strength of brands is important because news brands do
                                                                                                                                         not always correspond to news content. Selecting based on brands—as opposed to headlines

                                                                                                                                  120    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                      ARI      7 April 2013     1:28


                                                                                                                            or summaries—can contribute to breaking down belief defenses. When a branded information
                                                                                                                            ﬂow contains information that is inconsistent with the brand, users end up exposed to counterattitudinal information.7 These situations are likely to produce attitude change when users trust
                                                                                                                            the brand enough to accept the attitude-challenging information (Lupia & McCubbins 1998,
                                                                                                                            Baum & Groeling 2009).


                                                                                                                                Mismatches between brand and information can thus lead to inadvertent attitude-inconsistent
                                                                                                                            exposure even when people aim to avoid it. People may also seek out attitude-inconsistent news
                                                                                                                            deliberately when they expect to refute the inconsistent information. Hart et al.’s (2009) metaanalysis ﬁnds no selective exposure when subjects expected information to be of low quality—
                                                                                                                            probably a common expectation about opposing partisan sources.
                                                                                                                                Finally, news brands may not further selective exposure when people misperceive the brand.
                                                                                                                            Research on the “hostile media phenomenon” (Vallone et al. 1985) has long shown that people are
                                                                                                                            not good at assessing bias in news outlets. Some media users perceive media bias where none exists,
                                                                                                                            while others fail to detect bias when coverage is indeed slanted (e.g., Dalton et al. 1998). If people
                                                                                                                            select news based on false expectations created by their own cognitive biases or branding strategies,
                                                                                                                            the ﬁdelity of selective exposure declines and the importance of message processing rises.
                                                                                                                                It is not clear if brands will matter more or less for news selection online. News aggregators offer
                                                                                                                            users many different stories on the same topic distinguished only by headlines and brands (and,
                                                                                                                            increasingly, social cues). But aggregators also make it easier to sample stories quickly, potentially
                                                                                                                            reducing the need for branding. Other web content, such as YouTube, has more channel-like
                                                                                                                            features and may therefore advance branding.
                                                                                                                                Social media raise the possibility that technology unobtrusively selects content for users. Importing Sears & Freedman’s (1967) concept of “de facto selectivity” into the new media age, Mutz
                                                                                                                            & Young (2011) offer an insightful discussion of structural reasons why people may increasingly
                                                                                                                            encounter like-minded news even if they do not actively seek to avoid the other side. Recommender agents and search engines such as Google News exercise selectivity and may “learn” and
                                                                                                                            reinforce the tastes of the user. Mutz & Young argue, however, that they are unlikely to produce
                                                                                                                            de facto partisan selectivity because partisan tone is more difﬁcult to infer than other story characteristics; because smaller, more politically extreme sites are down-weighted by search algorithms;
                                                                                                                            and because rapid turnover of news stories prevents easy automatic classiﬁcation. Filtering by
                                                                                                                            humans—e.g., recommendations through social media (see Knobloch-Westerwick et al. 2005,
                                                                                                                            Messing & Westwood 2011)—may be more effective in generating de facto partisan selectivity
                                                                                                                            because people’s personal networks tend to be more homogenous than their media environments
                                                                                                                            (Mutz & Martin 2001, Gentzkow & Shapiro 2011). Yet, social media networks may not have the
                                                                                                                            same properties and composition as ofﬂine interpersonal networks.

                                                                                                                            News Junkies, Partisan Activists, and the Other 85%
                                                                                                                            The challenge for those who wish to demonstrate that Fox News, Rush Limbaugh, and Keith
                                                                                                                            Olbermann contribute to the polarization of American politics is substantial. First, independently
                                                                                                                            diverging parties can explain more partisan voting behavior. Second, the proliferation of entertainment options on cable television lowered turnout rates among indifferent Americans and polarized
                                                                                                                            elections before FNC and MSNBC even began operation. The impact of partisan media should
                                                                                                                            be judged against this baseline of forces that have led to stronger partisan inﬂuence on vote choice
                                                                                                                            and may plausibly have done so without making attitudes more partisan or polarized.
                                                                                                                              Similarly, selecting news about one’s preferred candidates sometimes results in exposure to bad news about that candidate
                                                                                                                            (Meffert et al. 2006).


                                                                                                                                                                                               www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   121


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                             Third, claims of partisan media inﬂuence face a theoretical challenge: if you think selective
                                                                                                                                         exposure increased polarization of partisans, you have to explain why they were not partisan
                                                                                                                                         before they started to watch cable news, listen to talk radio, and access opinion websites in a onesided fashion. Concentrated selective exposure might have few effects on political preferences and
                                                                                                                                         polarization, if heavy news viewers are highly selective precisely because they have very strong


                                                                                                                                         partisan views. If you want to claim that polarization is the result of moderates becoming partisan
                                                                                                                                         through selective exposure, you must explain how and why moderates would consistently and
                                                                                                                                         frequently encounter the same slant despite the fact that most large media outlets are quite centrist
                                                                                                                                         and partisan selectivity should be weakest among moderates.
                                                                                                                                             This review has offered considerable empirical evidence illustrating the force of these theoretical challenges. Most Americans remain politically moderate or indifferent, and their news
                                                                                                                                         exposure reveals nonideological patterns. Audience overlap between cable news channels of different ideological ﬂavors is quite high when cable news viewing is measured by automatic tracking
                                                                                                                                         and deﬁned to include even brief, irregular viewing. Internet use shows few signs of ideological
                                                                                                                                         segregation (Gentzkow & Shapiro 2011). This large segment of infrequent news consumers likely
                                                                                                                                         includes a good number of weak partisans who reﬂexively lean toward one side but are not interested enough to feed their partisan identity with much one-sided news exposure. It would be
                                                                                                                                         interesting to know where these weak partisans turn for information during extraordinary times
                                                                                                                                         (close elections, crises, threat) and if they are guided by ideological news brands, accuracy motivation, or nonideological selection criteria. Evidence collected by Stroud (2011, pp. 209–10) and
                                                                                                                                         Gentzkow & Shapiro (2011, pp. 1828–29) suggests that selective Internet and cable news exposure did not change much as the approaching 2008 election increased audiences. For the median
                                                                                                                                         voter, more ideologically consistent parties and new partisan media outlets may clarify the political
                                                                                                                                         options but do not make the choice easier or more appealing.
                                                                                                                                             A small segment of the population does consume a lot of news in a fairly one-sided fashion.
                                                                                                                                         Perhaps 10–15% of Americans watch a considerable amount of cable news. A majority of these
                                                                                                                                         “news junkies” appears to specialize in one of the three cable news channels and select mostly
                                                                                                                                         ideologically matching content on other media. Regardless of the precise number of ideologically
                                                                                                                                         indiscriminate casual news consumers and ideologically driven news junkies, it will be beneﬁcial
                                                                                                                                         to deﬁne and distinguish these two population segments more clearly.
                                                                                                                                             Another productive move for future research would be to reconcile different deﬁnitions of
                                                                                                                                         “activists” and “the politically engaged.” Some studies showing evidence for attitude polarization
                                                                                                                                         among the more engaged use general population surveys and identify the politically active
                                                                                                                                         segment based on political knowledge, political interest, or self-reported political participation
                                                                                                                                         (e.g., Jacobson 2000, Evans 2003, Abramowitz & Saunders 2008, Baldassarri & Gelman 2008).
                                                                                                                                         Other scholars have deﬁned activists more narrowly as convention delegates (e.g., Layman et al.
                                                                                                                                         2010) or “party regulars” (Cohen et al. 2008). Layman et al. (2010), for example, ﬁnd rising
                                                                                                                                         interparty differences and belief consistency in a sample of convention delegates. The size of the
                                                                                                                                         segment deﬁned as active thus varies from a few thousand people (delegates) to maybe a third
                                                                                                                                         of the population (politically interested Americans). It is not yet clear what it means to say that
                                                                                                                                         activists have become more polarized. No compelling evidence exists that partisan media played
                                                                                                                                         a role in activists’ polarization. Whether heavily concentrated, ideologically one-sided news
                                                                                                                                         exposure is a cause, a consequence, or largely unrelated, future research should aim to understand
                                                                                                                                         how strongly interested, highly knowledgeable partisan activists could become more partisan
                                                                                                                                         still. The data reviewed here indicate this will mean zeroing in on a small subset of the American
                                                                                                                                         public.
                                                                                                                                             The difference between widespread news consumption with considerable selective exposure
                                                                                                                                         and concentrated selective exposure in a fairly small news audience is important. The ﬁrst scenario

                                                                                                                                  122    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                     ARI     7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                            raises the specter of ideological propaganda driving “polarized America” to the political fringes.
                                                                                                                            The second scenario leads us to expect ideologically slanted news media to have limited inﬂuence
                                                                                                                            on mass polarization. On balance, this review ﬁnds more evidence for the second scenario. A caveat
                                                                                                                            to this conclusion is that we cannot currently measure the ideological slant of news consumption
                                                                                                                            across all media platforms unless we rely on surveys, but survey-based self-reports lead us astray.


                                                                                                                            Firmer conclusions about the effect of partisan media require better measurement of who is
                                                                                                                            exposed to partisan media.
                                                                                                                                Ideologically one-sided news exposure may be largely conﬁned to a small, activist segment
                                                                                                                            of the population, but this segment has disproportionate political inﬂuence. Activists shape the
                                                                                                                            political choices of the American public. New technologies make it easier for activists not just
                                                                                                                            to consume ideologically one-sided news but to add their own opinion to the mix. Part of “the
                                                                                                                            media” in this account—especially small websites not run for ﬁnancial proﬁt and commercial
                                                                                                                            outlets that cater to ideological niches—are conduits for activists’ partisan messages as much as
                                                                                                                            they are independent editorial voices. These ideologues may use their new connections into the
                                                                                                                            homes of core party constituencies to mobilize the fringes, raise money, and make compromise
                                                                                                                            more difﬁcult. The main danger of this more partisan media environment is not the polarization of
                                                                                                                            ordinary Americans but a growing disconnect between increasingly partisan activists and largely
                                                                                                                            centrist and modestly involved masses. The median voter has never been so bored.


                                                                                                                            DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
                                                                                                                            The author is not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that might
                                                                                                                            be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.


                                                                                                                            ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                                                                                                                            I thank Kevin Arceneaux, Jamie Druckman, Mo Fiorina, Eitan Hersh, Marty Gilens, Paul Goren,
                                                                                                                            Jay Hamilton, Michael LaCour, Matt Levendusky, Jesse Shapiro, Paul Starr, Talia Stroud, Jim
                                                                                                                            Webster, and an anonymous reviewer for reading an earlier version of this manuscript and providing helpful feedback. I am grateful to John Zaller for particularly detailed and stimulating
                                                                                                                            comments. Thanks to seminar participants at the University of Michigan and Ohio State University for their reactions to an earlier version of this paper.


                                                                                                                            LITERATURE CITED
                                                                                                                            Abramowitz AI, Saunders KL. 1998. Ideological realignment in the U.S. electorate. J. Polit. 60:634–52
                                                                                                                            Abramowitz AI, Saunders KL. 2008. Is polarization a myth? J. Polit. 70:542–55
                                                                                                                            Adamic LA, Glance N. 2005. The Political Blogosphere and the 2004 U.S. Election: Divided They Blog. Ann Arbor:
                                                                                                                                Univ. Mich. Press
                                                                                                                            Arceneaux K, Johnson M. 2007. Channel surﬁng: does choice reduce videomalaise? Presented at Annu. Meet.
                                                                                                                                Midwest Polit. Sci. Assoc., Chicago, Apr. 12–15
                                                                                                                            Arceneaux K, Johnson M. 2010. Does media fragmentation produce mass polarization? Selective exposure and a new
                                                                                                                                era of minimal effects. Presented at Annu. Meet. Am. Polit. Sci. Assoc., Washington, DC, Sep. 1–4
                                                                                                                            Arceneaux K, Johnson M, Murphy C. 2012. Polarized political communication, oppositional media hostility,
                                                                                                                                and selective exposure. J. Polit. 74:174–86
                                                                                                                            Baldassarri D, Gelman A. 2008. Partisans without constraint: political polarization and trends in American
                                                                                                                                public opinion. Am. J. Sociol. 114:408–46
                                                                                                                            Bartels LM. 1998. Electoral continuity and change, 1868–1996. Electoral Stud. 17:301–26
                                                                                                                            Bartels LM. 2000. Partisanship and voting behavior, 1952–1996. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 44:35–50


                                                                                                                                                                                        www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   123


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                         Bartels LM. 2002. Beyond the running tally: partisan bias in political perceptions. Polit. Behav. 24:117–50
                                                                                                                                         Baum MA, Groeling T. 2008. New media and the polarization of American political discourse. Polit. Commun.
                                                                                                                                              25:345–65
                                                                                                                                         Baum MA, Groeling T. 2009. Shot by the messenger: partisan cues and public opinion regarding national
                                                                                                                                              security and war. Polit. Behav. 31:157–86
                                                                                                                                         Bennett WL, Iyengar S. 2008. A new era of minimal effects? The changing foundations of political communication. J. Commun. 58:707–31
                                                                                                                                         Berry JM, Sobieraj S. 2011. Understanding the rise of talk radio. PS: Polit. Sci. Polit. 44:762–67
                                                                                                                                         Carsey TM, Layman GC. 2006. Changing sides or changing minds? Party identiﬁcation and policy preferences
                                                                                                                                              in the American electorate. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 50:464–77
                                                                                                                                         Chong D, Druckman JN. 2007. Framing public opinion in competitive democracies. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev.
                                                                                                                                              101:637–55
                                                                                                                                         Coe K, Tewksbury D, Bond BJ, Drogos KL, Porter RW, et al. 2008. Hostile news: partisan use and perceptions
                                                                                                                                              of cable news programming. J. Commun. 58:201–19
                                                                                                                                         Cohen M, Karol D, Noel H, Zaller J. 2008. The party decides: presidential nominations before and after reform.
                                                                                                                                              Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press. xi, 404 pp.
                                                                                                                                         Converse PE. 1964. The nature of belief systems in mass publics. In Ideology and Discontent, ed. DE Apter,
                                                                                                                                              pp. 206–61. New York: Free Press
                                                                                                                                         Converse PE, Markus GB. 1979. Plus ça change: the new CPS election study panel. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev.
                                                                                                                                              73:32–49
                                                                                                                                         D’Alessio D, Allen M. 2000. Media bias in presidential elections: a meta-analysis. J. Commun. 50:133–56
                                                                                                                                         Dalton RJ, Beck PA, Huckfeldt R. 1998. Partisan cues and the media: information ﬂows in the 1992 presidential
                                                                                                                                              election. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 92:111–26
                                                                                                                                         DellaVigna S, Kaplan E. 2007. The Fox News effect: media bias and voting. Q. J. Econ. 122:1187–234
                                                                                                                                         Dilliplane S. 2011. All the news you want to hear: the impact of partisan news exposure on political participation.
                                                                                                                                              Public Opin. Q. 75:287–316
                                                                                                                                         DiMaggio P, Evans J, Bryson B. 1996. Have Americans’ social attitudes become more polarized? Am. J. Sociol.
                                                                                                                                              102:690–755
                                                                                                                                         Druckman JN, Bolsen T. 2011. Framing, motivated reasoning, and opinions about emergent technologies.
                                                                                                                                              J. Commun. 61:659–88
                                                                                                                                         Druckman JN, Fein J, Leeper TJ. 2012. A source of bias in public opinion stability. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev.
                                                                                                                                              106:430–54
                                                                                                                                         Druckman JN, Peterson E, Slothuus R. 2013. How elite partisan polarization affects public opinion formation.
                                                                                                                                              Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. In press
                                                                                                                                         Evans JH. 2003. Have Americans’ attitudes become more polarized? An update. Soc. Sci. Q. 84:71–90
                                                                                                                                         Feldman L, Maibach EW, Roser-Renouf C, Leiserowitz A. 2012. Climate on cable: the nature and impact of
                                                                                                                                              global warming coverage on Fox News, CNN, and MSNBC. Int. J. Press-Polit. 17:3–31
                                                                                                                                         Festinger L. 1957. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press
                                                                                                                                         Festinger L. 1964. Conﬂict, Decision, and Dissonance. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press
                                                                                                                                         Fiorina MP. 2002. Parties and partisanship: a 40-year retrospective. Polit. Behav. 24:93–115
                                                                                                                                         Fiorina MP. 2006. Culture War? The Myth of a Polarized America. New York: Longman
                                                                                                                                         Fiorina MP, Abrams SJ. 2008. Political polarization in the American public. Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 11:563–88
                                                                                                                                         Fischer P, Jonas E, Frey D, Schulz-Hardt S. 2005. Selective exposure to information: the impact of information
                                                                                                                                              limits. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 35:469–92
                                                                                                                                         Fleisher R, Bond JR. 2000. Partisanship and the President’s quest for votes on the ﬂoor of Congress. In Polarized
                                                                                                                                              Politics: Congress and the President in a Partisan Era, ed. JR Bond, R Fleisher, pp. 154–85. Washington,
                                                                                                                                              DC: CQ Press
                                                                                                                                         Fleisher R, Bond JR. 2004. The shrinking middle in the US Congress. Br. J. Polit. Sci. 34:429–51
                                                                                                                                         FOX. 2011. Super Bowl XLV on FOX is most-watched program in TV history. Press release, Feb. 7
                                                                                                                                         Frey D. 1986. Recent research on selective exposure to information. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 19:41–80
                                                                                                                                         Garrett RK. 2009a. Echo chambers online? Politically motivated selective exposure among Internet news
                                                                                                                                              users. J. Comput.-Mediat. Commun. 14:265–85


                                                                                                                                  124    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                     ARI     7 April 2013    1:28


                                                                                                                            Garrett RK. 2009b. Politically motivated reinforcement seeking: reframing the selective exposure debate.
                                                                                                                                J. Commun. 59:676–99
                                                                                                                            Gasper JT. 2011. Shifting ideologies? Re-examining media bias. Q. J. Polit. Sci. 6:85–102
                                                                                                                            Gentzkow M, Shapiro JM. 2006. Media bias and reputation. J. Polit. Econ. 114:280–316
                                                                                                                            Gentzkow M, Shapiro JM. 2010. What drives media slant? Evidence from US daily newspapers. Econometrica
                                                                                                                                78:35–71


                                                                                                                            Gentzkow M, Shapiro JM. 2011. Ideological segregation online and ofﬂine. Q. J. Econ. 126:1799–839
                                                                                                                            Gerber AS, Karlan D, Bergan D. 2009. Does the media matter? A ﬁeld experiment measuring the effect of
                                                                                                                                newspapers on voting behavior and political opinions. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 1:35–52
                                                                                                                            Goren P. 2005. Party identiﬁcation and core political values. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 49:882–97
                                                                                                                            Grabe ME, Bucy EP. 2009. Image Bite Politics: News and the Visual Framing of Elections. New York: Oxford
                                                                                                                                Univ. Press
                                                                                                                            Graf J, Aday S. 2008. Selective attention to online political information. J. Broadcasting Electron. Media 52:86–
                                                                                                                            Green D, Palmquist B, Schickler E. 2002. Partisan Hearts and Minds. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press
                                                                                                                            Groeling T. 2008. Who’s the fairest of them all? An empirical test for partisan bias on ABC, CBS, NBC, and
                                                                                                                                Fox News. Presidential Stud. Q. 38:631–57
                                                                                                                            Groseclose T, Milyo J. 2005. A measure of media bias. Q. J. Econ. 120:1191–237
                                                                                                                            Hamilton JT. 2004. All the News That’s Fit to Sell: How the Market Transforms Information into News. Princeton,
                                                                                                                                NJ: Princeton Univ. Press
                                                                                                                            Hargittai E, Gallo J, Kane M. 2008. Cross-ideological discussions among conservative and liberal bloggers.
                                                                                                                                Public Choice 134:67–86
                                                                                                                            Hart W, Albarracin D, Eagly AH, Brechan I, Lindberg M, Lisa M. 2009. Feeling validated versus being
                                                                                                                                correct: a meta-analysis of selective exposure to information. Psychol. Bull. 135:555–88
                                                                                                                            Hetherington MJ. 2001. Resurgent mass partisanship: the role of elite polarization. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 95:619–
                                                                                                                            Hetherington MJ. 2009. Putting polarization in perspective. Br. J. Polit. Sci. 39:413–48
                                                                                                                            Ho DE, Quinn KM. 2008. Measuring explicit political positions of media. Q. J. Polit. Sci. 3:353–77
                                                                                                                            Holbert RL, Hmielowski JD, Weeks BE. 2012. Clarifying relations between ideology and ideologicallyoriented cable TV news consumption: a case of suppression. Commun. Res. 39:194–216
                                                                                                                            Hollander BA. 2008. Tuning out or tuning elsewhere? Partisanship, polarization, and media migration from
                                                                                                                                1998 to 2006. J. Mass Commun. Q. 85:23–40
                                                                                                                            Hopkins DJ, Ladd JM. 2012. The consequences of broader media choice: evidence from the expansion of Fox News.
                                                                                                                                Work. pap., Georgetown Univ.
                                                                                                                            Iyengar S, Hahn KS. 2009. Red media, blue media: evidence of ideological selectivity in media use. J. Commun.
                                                                                                                                59:19–39
                                                                                                                            Iyengar S, Hahn KS, Krosnick JA, Walker J. 2008. Selective exposure to campaign communication: the role
                                                                                                                                of anticipated agreement and issue public membership. J. Polit. 70:186–200
                                                                                                                            Iyengar S, Sood G, Lelkes Y. 2012. Fear and loathing in party politics: a social identity perspective on polarization. Public Opin. Q. 76:405–31
                                                                                                                            Jackman SD, LaCour M, Lewis JB, Vavreck L. 2012. Digital ﬁngerprints: a new method for measuring political
                                                                                                                                advertising. Prepared for Annu. Meet. Am. Polit. Sci. Assoc., New Orleans (cancelled)
                                                                                                                            Jacobson GC. 2000. Party polarization in national politics: the electoral connection. In Polarized Politics:
                                                                                                                                Congress and the President in a Partisan Era, ed. JR Bond, R Fleisher, pp. 9–30. Washington, DC: CQ
                                                                                                                                Press
                                                                                                                            Jacobson GC. 2003. Partisan polarization in presidential support: the electoral connection. Congress Presidency
                                                                                                                                30:1–36
                                                                                                                            Jamieson KH, Cappella JN. 2008. Echo Chamber: Rush Limbaugh and the Conservative Media Establishment.
                                                                                                                                New York: Oxford Univ. Press
                                                                                                                            Kim YM. 2009. Issue publics in the new information environment: selectivity, domain-speciﬁcity, and extremity. Commun. Res. 36:254–84
                                                                                                                            Knobloch-Westerwick S, Sharma N, Hansen DL, Alter S. 2005. Impact of popularity indications on readers’
                                                                                                                                selective exposure to online news. J. Broadcasting Electron. Media 49:296–313


                                                                                                                                                                                          www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   125


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                              ARI   7 April 2013   1:28


                                                                                                                                         LaCour MJ. 2012. A balanced news diet, not selective exposure: evidence from a direct measure of media exposure.
                                                                                                                                             Work. pap., Univ. Calif. Los Angeles
                                                                                                                                         Layman GC, Carsey TM. 2002a. Party polarization and “conﬂict extension” in the American electorate.
                                                                                                                                             Am. J. Polit. Sci. 46:786–802
                                                                                                                                         Layman GC, Carsey TM. 2002b. Party polarization and party structuring of policy attitudes: a comparison of
                                                                                                                                             three NES panel studies. Polit. Behav. 24:199–236


                                                                                                                                         Layman GC, Carsey TM, Green JC, Herrera R, Cooperman R. 2010. Activists and conﬂict extension in
                                                                                                                                             American party politics. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 104:324–46
                                                                                                                                         Levendusky MS. 2009a. The microfoundations of mass polarization. Polit. Anal. 17:162–76
                                                                                                                                         Levendusky MS. 2009b. The Partisan Sort: How Liberals Became Democrats and Conservatives Became Republicans.
                                                                                                                                             Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
                                                                                                                                         Levendusky MS. 2012a. Affect effects: Do viewers dislike and distrust the opposition after partisan media exposure?
                                                                                                                                             Work. pap., Univ. Penn.
                                                                                                                                         Levendusky MS. 2012b. Do partisan media polarize voters? Work. pap., Univ. Penn.
                                                                                                                                         Lodge M, Taber C. 2000. Three steps toward a theory of motivated political reasoning. In Elements of Reason:
                                                                                                                                             Cognition, Choice, and the Bounds of Rationality, ed. A Lupia, MD McCubbins, SL Popkin, pp. 183–213.
                                                                                                                                             Cambridge; New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
                                                                                                                                         Lord CG, Ross L, Lepper MR. 1979. Biased assimilation and attitude polarization: the effects of prior theories
                                                                                                                                             on subsequently considered evidence. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 37:2098–109
                                                                                                                                         Lowry DT, Shidler JA. 1998. The sound bites, the biters, and the bitten: a two-campaign test of the antiincumbent bias hypothesis in network TV news. J. Mass Commun. Q. 75:719–29
                                                                                                                                         Lupia A, McCubbins MD. 1998. The Democratic Dilemma: Can Citizens Learn What They Need to Know?
                                                                                                                                             Cambridge; New York: Cambridge Univ. Press. xiv, 282 pp.
                                                                                                                                         Mayer WG. 1998. Mass partisanship, 1946–1996. In Partisan Approaches to Postwar American Politics, ed. BE
                                                                                                                                             Shafer, pp. 186–219. New York: Chatham House
                                                                                                                                         McCarty NM, Poole KT, Rosenthal H. 2006. Polarized America: the Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches.
                                                                                                                                             Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
                                                                                                                                         Meffert MF, Chung S, Joiner AJ, Waks L, Garst J. 2006. The effects of negativity and motivated information
                                                                                                                                             processing during a political campaign. J. Commun. 56:27–51
                                                                                                                                         Messing S, Westwood SJ. 2011. Selective exposure in the age of social media: endorsements trump partisan source
                                                                                                                                             afﬁliation when selecting online news media. Work. pap., Dep. Communication, Stanford Univ.
                                                                                                                                         Morris JS, Francia PL. 2010. Cable news, public opinion, and the 2004 party conventions. Polit. Res. Q.
                                                                                                                                             63:834–49
                                                                                                                                         Mutz DC, Martin PS. 2001. Facilitating communication across lines of political difference: the role of mass
                                                                                                                                             media. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 95:97–114
                                                                                                                                         Mutz DC, Young L. 2011. Communication and public opinion: plus ça change? Public Opin. Q. 75:1018–44
                                                                                                                                         Napoli PM. 2003. Audience Economics: Media Institutions and the Audience Marketplace. New York: Columbia
                                                                                                                                             Univ. Press
                                                                                                                                         Petrova M. 2011. Newspapers and parties: how advertising revenues created an independent press. Am. Polit.
                                                                                                                                             Sci. Rev. 105:790–808
                                                                                                                                         Poole KT, Rosenthal H. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call Voting. New York: Oxford
                                                                                                                                             Univ. Press
                                                                                                                                         Prior M. 2007. Post-Broadcast Democracy: How Media Choice Increases Inequality in Political Involvement and
                                                                                                                                             Polarizes Elections. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
                                                                                                                                         Prior M. 2009a. The immensely inﬂated news audience: assessing bias in self-reported news exposure. Public
                                                                                                                                             Opin. Q. 73:130–43
                                                                                                                                         Prior M. 2009b. Improving media effects research through better measurement of news exposure. J. Polit.
                                                                                                                                             71:893–908
                                                                                                                                         Prior M. 2012. Who watches presidential debates? Measurement problems in campaign effects research.
                                                                                                                                             Public Opin. Q. 76:350–63
                                                                                                                                         Project for Excellence in Journalism. 2011. The State of the News Media 2011. Washington, DC: Project for
                                                                                                                                             Excellence in Journalism

                                                                                                                                  126    Prior


PL16CH06-Prior                                                                                                                     ARI     7 April 2013    1:28


                                                                                                                            Project for Excellence in Journalism. 2012. The State of the News Media 2012. Washington, DC: Project for
                                                                                                                                 Excellence in Journalism
                                                                                                                            Redlawsk D. 2002. Hot cognition or cool consideration? Testing the effects of motivated reasoning on political
                                                                                                                                 decision making. J. Polit. 64:1021–44
                                                                                                                            Redlawsk DP, Civettini AJW, Emmerson KM. 2010. The affective tipping point: Do motivated reasoners
                                                                                                                                 ever “get it”? Polit. Psychol. 31:563–93


                                                                                                                            Rohde DW. 1991. Parties and Leaders in the Postreform House. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
                                                                                                                            Sears DO, Freedman JL. 1967. Selective exposure to information: a critical review. Public Opin. Q. 31:194–213
                                                                                                                            Shaw DR, Sparrow BH. 1999. From the inner ring out: news congruence, cue-taking, and campaign coverage.
                                                                                                                                 Polit. Res. Q. 52:323–51
                                                                                                                            Sinclair B. 2000. Hostile partners: the President, Congress and lawmaking in the partisan 1990s. In Polarized
                                                                                                                                 Politics: Congress and the President in a Partisan Era, ed. JR Bond, R Fleisher, pp. 134–53. Washington,
                                                                                                                                 DC: CQ Press
                                                                                                                            Sobieraj S, Berry JM. 2011. From incivility to outrage: political discourse in blogs, talk radio, and cable news.
                                                                                                                                 Polit. Commun. 28:19–41
                                                                                                                            Stoker L, Jennings MK. 2008. Of time and the development of partisan polarization. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 52:619–35
                                                                                                                            Stroud NJ. 2011. Niche News: The Politics of News Choice. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. vi, 257 pp.
                                                                                                                            Taber CS, Lodge M. 2006. Motivated skepticism in the evaluation of political beliefs. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 50:755–
                                                                                                                            Valentino NA, Banks AJ, Hutchings VL, Davis AK. 2009. Selective exposure in the internet age: the interaction
                                                                                                                                 between anxiety and information utility. Polit. Psychol. 30:591–613
                                                                                                                            Vallone RP, Ross L, Lepper MR. 1985. The hostile media phenomenon: biased perception and perceptions
                                                                                                                                 of media bias in coverage of the Beirut massacre. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 49:577–85
                                                                                                                            Webster JG. 2005. Beneath the veneer of fragmentation: television audience polarization in a multichannel
                                                                                                                                 world. J. Commun. 55:366–82
                                                                                                                            Zaller J. 1992. The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press. xiii, 367 pp.
                                                                                                                            Zaller J. 1996. The myth of massive media impact revived. New support for a discredited idea. In Political
                                                                                                                                 Persuasion and Attitude Change, ed. DC Mutz, PM Sniderman, RA Brody, pp. 17–78. Ann Arbor: Univ.
                                                                                                                                 Mich. Press


                                                                                                                                                                                          www.annualreviews.org • Media and Political Polarization   127