Fostering Civil Discourse Online: Linguistic Behavior in
Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives
EUGENIA HA RIM RHO, University of California, Irvine, USA
GLORIA MARK, University of California, Irvine, USA
MELISSA MAZMANIAN, University of California, Irvine, USA


Linguistic style and affect shape how users perceive and assess political content on social media. Using
linguistic methods to compare political discourse on far-left, mainstream and alt-right news articles covering
the #MeToo movement, we reveal rhetorical similarities and differences in commenting behavior across the                                          147
political spectrum. We employed natural language processing techniques and qualitative methods on a
corpus of approximately 30,000 Facebook comments from three politically distinct news publishers. Our
findings show that commenting behavior reflects how social movements are framed and understood within
a particular political orientation. Surprisingly, these data reveal that the structural patterns of discourse
among commenters from the two alternative news sites are similar in terms of their relationship to those
from the mainstream – exhibiting polarization, generalization, and othering of perspectives in political
conversation. These data have implications for understanding the possibility for civil discourse in online
venues and the role of commenting behavior in polarizing media sources in undermining such discourse. 1
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence; Natural language processing;
Discourse, dialogue and pragmatics
KEYWORDS
News media; SNS; political discourse; polarization; hashtags; online social movements; embedding; TF-IDF;
word2vec; NLP
ACM Reference format:
Eugenia Ha Rim Rho, Gloria Mark, and Melissa Mazmanian. 2018. Fostering Civil Discourse Online: Linguistic Behavior in
Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives. In Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction,
Vol. 2, CSCW, Article 147 (November 2018). ACM, New York, NY. 28 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274416


1 INTRODUCTION
Obtaining political news or information through online news media is commonplace in the
current digital age. Many, if not most, online news sites offer functionality for commenting on
news items, providing a public sphere where people can engage in modern day political discourse
[73, 91, 96, 99]. Most news sites have a presence on social networking sites (SNS) such as
Facebook, where discussions on moral and political issues routinely take place [44, 55, 73, 96,


Author’s addresses: Eugenia Ha Rim Rho, Gloria Mark, Melissa Mazmanian (hrrho, gmark, mmazmani @uci.edu), Department of
Informatics Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences University of California, Irvine 5019 Donald Bren Hall Irvine, CA
92697-3440 USA.
1 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that

copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from Permissions@acm.org.
Copyright © ACM 2018 2573-0142/2018/November –Article 147 $15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/3274416


 Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:2                                                                                           E. H. M. Rho et al.

106]. In fact, over the past few years users have been increasingly using SNS to discover news
[55] – users are not only reading, but increasingly sharing and commenting on personal
thoughts, asking questions, and engaging in discussion with those connected within their
networks [2, 44, 149]. An important aspect of this online political news sphere, documented
repeatedly, is that there is a strong partisan divide on what news sources people typically rely on
and trust [5, 96, 99, 106, 145]. People tend to habitually consume the news source of their choice
based on political beliefs [96, 106, 108, 131, 145] and engage in discussion within circles of similar
political affinity [17, 58, 86, 99].
Researchers in Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) and Human Computer
Interaction (HCI) have repeatedly shown that users engage with more politically homogenous
communities along partisan lines [4, 17, 34, 58, 73, 149]. Users curate their social media feeds that
are reflective of their political preferences [50, 91, 106] and change their settings to see fewer
posts from individuals in their network who hold differing political views [96, 145]. This is not
surprising especially in light of the highly polarized political climate after the 2016 presidential
election. Based on a Pew Research survey conducted right after the election, nearly two-thirds of
Americans reported that online encounters with users on the opposite side of the political
spectrum leave them feeling as if they have even less in common than they thought [44].
Furthermore, about 60% of American adults reported social media interactions with other users
with opposing political views to be stressful and frustrating while a much smaller proportion
(34%) found them interesting or informative [44].
News organizations are indeed aware of this polarized landscape and take it into consideration
when trying to drive online traffic to their sites. For example, a group of news sites that target
the politically far-left and far-right are both owned by the same company that often post their
articles on social media [1, 131, 132]. Hence, even when reporting on the same fact or event, the
company uses two different headlines with clear partisan slants [132] for their respective news
sites even though the text of the articles below each headline are nearly identical [61]. As a
result, coverage of the same set of events or facts are presented with radically different hyperpartisan undertones which can serve as qualitatively distinct fodder for political discourse among
audiences depending on which news media they consume. Such practices can not only shift the
focus of political discussion around identical events, but also isolate political discourse into echochambers [139] created by homogenous communities along partisan lines.
In our work we use the #MeToo movement as the topical lens to examine the nature of political
discourse on SNS using the cases of three politically distinct (far-left, mainstream, and alt-right)
news publishers on Facebook. Online social movements embody important social issues that
generate momentum and political discourse [13, 24, 31, 53, 59, 69, 78]. The linguistic style and
affect of online comments are known to influence how users evaluate and react to content on
social media [7, 25, 27, 28, 38, 52, 71, 82, 147]. This implies that the way people talk about online
social movements could in fact, influence their perception of related topics.
In this work we theorize that linguistic behavior not only shapes perceptions, but can also reflect
and even influence various aspects of social identities, including political orientation. The goal of
our work is to use NLP techniques and qualitative methods to discover how linguistic practices
might differ among people with distinct political views and to understand how such practices
may contribute to the formation of political identities and perspectives. Studying and contrasting
language patterns of commenters from three politically distinct sites enable us to take a deeper


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                                 28:3

dive into the nature of the conversation that is happening in these public spheres across users
who are polarized and potentially non-overlapping.
Our findings show that linguistic analysis tools are promising methods to inform current
understanding of how people react to a political movement based on their commenting behavior.
The nature of discourse in both the far-left and alt-right sites is structurally similar to each other
in terms of their relationship to the mainstream. Through our work, we show that these
structural similarities in commenting behavior might serve to reinforce polarization.
The main contribution of our work lies in the demonstration of how different components of
linguistic behavior shape diverse political framings [23, 45, 90] of a social topic based on the
political orientation of the commenter’s news source. This work contributes to developing a
better understanding of the underlying linguistic factors that hinder as well as encourage healthy
political conversation among users of politically diverse websites. We believe such factors are
important in online political dialogue to not only understand ways to reduce incivility, but also to
widen perspectives among audiences with opposing political viewpoints.

2 BACKGROUND

2.1 #MeToo Movement
On October 15, 2017, American actress Alyssa Milano took to Twitter to encourage women
sexually harassed or assaulted in the past to use “MeToo” [107, 123, 159] – a phrase first used by
Tarana Burke in this context in 2006 [48] – to demonstrate the pervasiveness of the problem.
Within 24 hours, the hashtag was tweeted more than 500,000 times and used by more than 4.7
million Facebook users in approximately 12 million posts [123]. Since then, the hashtag spread
across 85 countries in dozens of other languages with local variations of the phrase [107].
Millions of SNS users used “#MeToo” to share experiences of sexual assault [10, 60], prompting a
national discussion of sexual misconduct at the workplace in many countries [29, 30, 107, 112,
157]. Events surrounding the #MeToo movement, however, garnered mixed reactions from the
public with diverse media portrayals from various news sources across the political spectrum.
While many praised the movement for serving as a platform for marginalized voices [29, 60, 157],
others criticized the movement as a reflexive social media witch-hunt [72, 121, 158, 159] with an
unclear agenda around who is and is not (e.g., sex workers and males) [30, 36] allowed to
participate or use the hashtag. Garnering significant amounts of both support [11, 32, 122, 135]
and backlash [14, 67, 120, 142, 143, 156], the online social movement generated both massive onand offline political discourse on SNS [3, 33, 60, 155].

2.2 The Role of Hashtags in Online Social Movements & News Media Practices
Hashtags are powerful tools that focus attention, and in essence ‘brand’ an issue. As a locus of
media attention and a shorthand phrase that serves to link numerous texts, hashtags can mobilize
people around specific topics and dramatically amplify a message that goes ‘viral’. Hence, in the
context of online social movements, hashtags can effectively operate as political framing tools
[57, 64, 65], social markers of identity [63, 97, 117], and conversation facilitators [21, 69, 97, 105,
133, 154].
The power of hashtags is demonstrated through the intense momentum and political discourse
surrounding #Blacklivesmatter, #Ferguson, and more recently with the #TimesUp and #MeToo


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:4                                                                                           E. H. M. Rho et al.

movements. Researchers have shown that hashtags can “rapidly elevate discourse beyond specific
localities” [65] and raise the overall profile of its intended message as demonstrated in several
studies [15, 24, 53, 118, 148]. News media companies also understand such possibilities that
hashtags can afford. Hashtags that take off, not only increase audience reach, but also elicit
strong emotional responses that play on the social and political identity of the reader based on
where he or she may stand in regards to the online social movement [57, 69, 77, 118]. That said, it
is not surprising that news media companies often use political hashtags in their headlines as a
way to cater content to specific viewership profiles (based on political orientation, age, gender
etc.). Therefore, selection of news source may in return, influence the nature of political discourse
around online hashtag movements along partisan lines. This could possibly explain why, while
reactions around online hashtag movements are often messy, they are known to be strongly
divided by political orientation [24, 47, 69, 136]. That said, to our knowledge, our work is the first
to examine from a linguistic perspective what and how people talk about the events and issues
surrounding an online social movement in relation to the political orientation of the news source
they consume on social media.

3 LINGUISTIC BEHAVIOR IN POLITICAL DISCOURSE
Understanding linguistic behavior in political commentary could shed light on factors that might
reinforce partisan views. Scholars have shown that linguistic style is associated with
interpersonal and social differences [22, 39, 56, 103, 110] (e.g. linguistic behavior differs by gender
[16, 85, 126]). In fact, social identity is a product of linguistic practices [22], meaning that
“identity is something that is constituted through social action, [especially] through language”
[22]. According to sociolinguistic research, “identity emerges from the specific conditions of
linguistic interaction” [22] rather than serving as a “pre-existing source of linguistic practice”
[22]. Thus, linguistic behavior can potentially reflect deep differences among people involving
identity and social differences.
Concerning political views, research has also shown that the way people talk about politics, the
language they use, and the topics they focus on affect their evaluation and perception about
politics [28, 54, 68, 79, 115, 116, 147, 151]. For example, swear words and vulgarity reduces the
perceived persuasiveness of political messages [25]. When individuals receive political
information intertwined with affective language, this language “creates a particular mood giving
them another consideration that seems relevant” [147]. For example, negative affective language
influences how individuals make decisions toward political subjects [146, 147]. Political
information communicated with negative affective language persists longer in people’s memory
compared to information delivered through neutral language [147]. This in turn can influence
certain keywords to be mentioned more frequently compared to others, leading to opinion
reinforcement [100, 101, 128] and thereby causing commenters to take more extreme positions
[49, 62, 100, 101, 152]. The consistent appearance of important keywords in online discussion, in
fact affects selective exposure [49, 91, 152], underpinning information that occurs most
frequently as the dominant perspective [91, 152] while marginalizing perspectives that are less
frequently mentioned or appear as less important [115, 116]. This can potentially reduce diversity
of perspectives in political discourse, a key element that allows society to find common ground
on important issues through democratic conversation [37, 115].
That said, differences revealed in linguistic patterns could serve as a building block for
understanding polarization and entrenchment in political views expressed on social media. Based


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                                 28:5

on this premise, our work investigates how linguistic styles differ among commenters from
politically distinct news sites, addressing the same topic embodied by an online social movement.
3.1 Research Questions
Based on the literature review, we expect the following linguistic attributes and patterns on
social media to affect perception of content, especially for “hot-button” issues embodied by the
#MeToo movement: 1) structural patterns of linguistic content, 2) semantic contexts, and 3)
rhetorical patterns based on important keywords associated with discussion themes. Hence, to
examine how these linguistic attributes and patterns might differ among people who produce and
consume different political information, we ask the following research questions. All research
questions are examined in the context of the #MeToo movement.
3.1.1 RQ1: What linguistic and affective attributes characterize commenting behavior across the
three politically distinct news sources covering #MeToo? Given that the linguistic style of online
comments is known to affect how users perceive content, this research question allows us to
uncover distinct structural patterns in linguistic behavior across the three publishing sites. Such
patterns may underlie factors inducing further polarization of perspectives among commenters.
As discussed above, negative affective language has been shown to have considerably stronger
effects on people’s attitudes than positive information, especially when the content is political
[95, 113]. Hence, the use of negative affective language, (e.g., anger) can have strong persuasive
influences [146, 147] in formation of political opinion. Furthermore, the use of socially offensive
language such as swear words or sexually explicit expressions can elicit affective reactions which
can lead to more entrenched opinions. Therefore, this research question will identify whether
differences exist among commenting behaviors in the three politically distinct sites, whether
there are strong trends around affective language patterns, and how these differences might be
associated with various viewpoints.
3.1.2 RQ2: What are the differences in the semantic contexts in which #MeToo is framed in the
commenting discussion across the three politically distinct news sources? Understanding how a
word is characterized by its nearby words can reveal key linguistic contexts in which it is
discussed [46]. People of diﬀerent political orientations may in fact discuss the same issue with
very diﬀerent contexts. Context, in turn, can inﬂuence how arguments are understood. For
example, the semantic context through which a topic is conversed has been shown to predict the
norms of online group discussion among diﬀerent weight loss communities on Reddit [26].
Hence, with this research question we investigate the latent contextual cues of words associated
with the token, “MeToo” across the three publishers by examining the semantic closeness of
nearby words.
3.1.3 RQ3: What kind of rhetorical patterns are observed from the discussion of the most important
keywords across commenters from the three politically distinct news sources? The types of
rhetorical engagement [83] that characterize political conversations can potentially reveal how
commenters understand and make sense of an issue. It can also inform us of the persuasive
tactics used on diﬀerent sides. This research question is comprised of two parts. First, we identify
the tokens that consistently appear in the commenting discussion among the three political news
sites. Then we use the token results as anchors from which to explore rhetorical patterns
surrounding these important keywords to help understand how the three political commenter
groups frame issues and construct arguments.


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:6                                                                                                             E. H. M. Rho et al.

4 METHODS

4.1 Data Source
After a careful review of approximately 100 news sources from mediabiasfactcheck.com as well
as their social media presence on Facebook, we selected three contrasting sites for our data
sources that represent three distinct political viewpoints: Democracy Now (DemNow) which
represents a far-left viewpoint, the New York Times (NYT) which represents a mainstream
viewpoint, and Breitbart which represents a right-wing viewpoint (referred to in popular culture
as the alt-right) 2. All three news publishers consistently posted their articles on Facebook. As
criteria for our selection, we used the number of Facebook page followers3, likes4, and the overall
number of #MeToo articles as well as the number of Facebook comments on these articles.

4.2 Data Collection
To gather data for this study, we first selected all article posts that included the phrase “#MeToo”
either in the article headline or in the text portion of the Facebook post during the period
between October 2017 (when Alyssa Milano first shared her tweet using #MeToo) and March
2018 from all three publishers’ Facebook pages. We used the Facebook API to collect all user
comments and replies from the selected article posts5. Unfortunately, due to Facebook’s API
restriction, we were unable to collect anonymized commenter ids6, which would have provided
us valuable information on the unique number of commenters.

Table 1. Number of comments & comment length from #MeToo articles shared by the 3 publishers
                                                         Democracy Now                      NYT                       Breitbart
                                                           (21 articles)                (62 articles)               (10 articles)
     Number of original                 mean                  35 (67)                     158 (282)                  927 (1,082)
     Facebook comments                 median                 30 (49)                      56 (128)                   553 (669)
           per article                   min                   8 (16)                       4 (4)                     297 (426)
      (total comments in                 max                 112 (220)                  2,003 (2,868)               3,306 (3,455)
         parentheses)                    total              743 (1,409)                9,811 (17,491)              9,267 (10,821)
                                        mean                     32                          124                         155
    Number of Facebook                 median                    20                           74                         140
     replies per article                 min                      5                            0                          38
                                         max                    108                          865                         326
                                         total                  666                         7,680                       1,554
                                     1st quartile                35                           35                          25
       Length of Facebook
                                        mean                    146                          139                          85
           comments
                                       median                    80                           80                          52
         (in number of
                                     3rd quartile               160                          170                         100
           characters)
                                         max                   4,972                        4,925                       7,904


2 DemNow and Breitbart are a close mirroring of each other in terms of political extremity [87, 88]. We take into consideration that NYT is

considered left-center [89].
3 Number of Facebook page followers at the time of data collection: DemNow=1.2M, NYT=15.1M, Breitbart=3.8M
4 Number of Facebook page likes at the time of data collection: DemNow=1.2M, NYT=15.5M, Breitbart=3.9M
5 Comments were not curated by the publishers and were publicly available on Facebook through the publishers’ Facebook page.
6 Only the owners of the publisher’s Facebook pages have API access to anonymized versions of the commenters’ user ids.


 Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                                    28:7

During this six-month period, there were a total of 21 published article posts from DemNow, 10
from Breitbart, and 62 from NYT Facebook pages. Such difference in the number of articles is a
potential limitation, which we discuss further in later sections. For our analyses, we used both
original comments and replies to these comments from all the #MeToo articles posted on the
three publishers’ Facebook pages, giving us a total of 17,491 user comments from NYT, 10,821
user comments from Breitbart, and 1,409 user comments from DemNow posts as shown in Table
1. While the number of average comments per article was highest in Breitbart news posts, the
average comment length in character count was the lowest compared to those of DemNow and
NYT.

4.3 Analysis
4.3.1 Linguistic Style & Affect (RQ1). In order to investigate the linguistic and affective traits
characterizing commenting behavior, we used the 2015 Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
(LIWC). LIWC is a well-validated psycholinguistic lexicon [109] widely used by HCI and CSCW
scholars to understand online discourse [20, 28, 39, 40]. We focused on six LIWC categories to
measure affect (positive emotion, negative emotion, and anger) and linguistic style (swear words,
informal language, and sexual words) based on prior findings on linguistic behavior in political
discourse as discussed in the literature review. We added the sexual word category given the
topical nature of the data as well as the fact that a large proportion of the swear words in the data
were related to sex.
4.3.2 Semantic Proximity to “MeToo” (RQ2). Unlike traditional topic modeling, word embeddings,
implemented through neural network architecture such as word2vec [93, 94] and GloVe [111]
reveal latent contextual cues of tokens by capturing the co-occurrence of terms with an
associated word. Hence, in order to answer RQ2, we used word2vec to quantify the semantic
proximity using cosine similarity distance between the token “MeToo” and nearby words that cooccur with it. Using this unsupervised learning algorithm, we built embedding models for each
publisher with a minimum count of 50 for all words based on a conservative window of 12
words7. Our total vocabulary size was 6,302, 23,655, and 12,507 unique tokens for DemNow, NYT,
and Breitbart, respectively. Before vectorizing our tokens, we lowercased all text and removed
stop words (e.g., functional words, such as “the”, “is”, “at”, etc.). We also customized our stop
words to ensure that words prefaced with the hashtag symbol, ‘#’ were not removed given the
nature of our data.
4.3.3 Rhetorical Patterns in Discussion of Important Keywords (RQ3). First, to investigate the
important keywords frequently discussed among commenters across the three different news
sites, we used term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) analysis. TF-IDF is a ranking
function widely used in information retrieval and text-mining to investigate how important a
word is within a corpus of text data [134, 153]. The importance of a word, or its TF-IDF weight
increases in proportion to the number of times the word appears in a document (e.g. one
comment from NYT), but is offset by the frequency of the word in the entire corpus (e.g. all
comments from NYT articles). To examine the important keywords discussed in the alternative
news sites (Breitbart and Democracy Now) in relation to those that appear in the more
mainstream news source (New York Times), we conducted two TF-IDF analyses – first on the

7 As most comments contained 12-14 words on average (x̅ =12 for Breitbart, x̅ =13 for DemNow, and x̅ =14 for NYT)


 Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:8                                                                                           E. H. M. Rho et al.

combined corpus of Breitbart and NYT comments and second, on the corpus of DemNow and
NYT comments.
Next, we used discourse analysis [51] to analyze all comments that included the top tokens with
the highest TF-IDF weights to explore the rhetorical patterns used by commenters in their
discussion of important keywords. Discourse analysis is a form of qualitative analysis that
involves identifying patterns, relationships, and values in text data [51], and has been used in
several HCI and CSCW works examining online comments [114, 150]. First, we thematically
grouped all 1302 comments with the top TF-IDF tokens (“sex”, “color”, “experience” “flirting”)
and used axial coding [138] to delve into each comment in greater depth. We performed
discourse analysis on the comments to identify consistent patterns of rhetoric across
commenters. All three authors iteratively engaged in thorough discussion and interpretation of
comments throughout the analysis.

5 RESULTS
Our findings show strong differences in linguistic style and affect across the comments from the
three politically distinct news publishers. Commenters from both the far-left and alt-right sites
use a significantly greater proportion of negative affective words and informal speech compared
to those who engage in discussion on mainstream news media (RQ1). Furthermore, the top
tokens with the highest semantic proximity to “MeToo” are thematically different across
comments from DemNow, NYT, and Breitbart, suggesting that the framing of discussion around
the MeToo hashtag is different based on the political orientation of the news source (RQ2).
Partisan identity is also reflected in the important keywords commenters discuss based on our
TF-IDF results (RQ3). By taking a closer examination of how the top tokens with the highest TFIDF weights are discussed among commenters, we examine distinct patterns of rhetoric and
discourse across the three groups in our data. We discuss our results in greater detail below.

5.1 RQ1: What linguistic and affective attributes characterize commenting
behavior across the three politically distinct news sources covering #MeToo?
Table 2 summarizes the six linguistic measures of affect and style on user comments on
DemNow, NYT and Breitbart #MeToo article posts shared by the three publishers’ Facebook
pages. In the summary table, we show the mean proportion of affective words considered swear,
informal, or sexual language. Given that the LIWC values for each comment across the three
news sources were not normally distributed, we used the Kruskal-Wallis test, a non-parametric
alternative of analysis of variance (ANOVA), to examine whether the differences in the
proportion of LIWC words were statistically significant across the three groups. The test
indicated that the proportion of words corresponding to each of the six LIWC categories was
indeed significantly different among the three corpora of comments from each publisher.
To understand the differences in more depth, we conducted Wilcoxon signed rank pairwise tests
for the three pairs of groups across the six LIWC categories. As shown in Table 3, pairwise tests
indicated that the proportion of lexical content based on affect and linguistic style were
significantly different (p-value <0.001, adjusted for a Bonferroni correction) for certain pairs. We
describe the differences in more detail in the following sections.


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                                 28:9

   Table 2. Proportion of LIWC words across Breitbart, Democracy Now, and New York Times
  comments. The Kruskal-Wallis test statistic (χ2) and corresponding p-values indicate that the
   proportion of lexical content is significantly different across the three groups (***=p<.001).

 LIWC Category          Democracy Now               New York Times              Breitbart                χ2       p
     Affect
Positive Emotion              0.0495                    0.0512                   0.0655              99.185      ***
Negative Emotion              0.0461                    0.0409                   0.0626              15.963      ***
      Anger                   0.0244                    0.0159                   0.0270              158.63      ***
Linguistic Style
      Swear                   0.0153                    0.0052                   0.0255              590.97      ***
    Informal                  0.0325                    0.0286                   0.0573              56.644      ***
     Sexual                   0.0109                    0.0048                   0.0147              61.792      ***


   Table 3. Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test with Bonferroni adjusted p-values (<0.05 =**, <0.001 =***)

                                   Democracy Now             Democracy Now            New York Times
           LIWC Category                 &                         &                        &
                                   New York Times               Breitbart                Breitbart
              Affect
         Positive Emotion                1.0000                  0.0003***                  2.0e-16***
         Negative Emotion                0.5684                  0.0076**                    0.0016**
               Anger                   6.4e-06***                2e-16***                   2.0e-16***
         Linguistic Style
               Swear                    2-16***                      0.32                   2.0e-16***
             Informal                  2.5e-05***                  1. 0000                  2.8e-11***
              Sexual                    0.0016**                 2.3e-10***                 5.1e-10***
5.1.1 Affect. There is a significantly higher proportion of both positive and negative emotional
words across Breitbart comments compared to DemNow and NYT comments. However, there
was no significant difference in the proportion of affective words between DemNow and NYT
comments. Breitbart comments also have the highest, and NYT comments the lowest proportion
of anger-related words among the three groups.
5.1.2 Linguistic Style. Comments from the three publishers also differed in terms of linguistic
style. There was a significantly higher proportion of sexual words across Breitbart comments
compared to those of DemNow and NYT comments. Breitbart comments contained nearly three
times the proportion of sexual words compared to NYT comments. DemNow comments
contained the second highest proportion of sexual words, with nearly twice the proportion found
in NYT comments. Furthermore, Facebook comments from Breitbart posts contained a
significantly greater proportion of swear words and informal speech compared to those written
on NYT article posts. In fact, the average proportion of swear words used in Breitbart comments
is five times higher, and the use of informal speech is nearly twice as greater than those used in
NYT comments. By contrast, the difference in the proportion of swear words and informal speech
between Breitbart and DemNow was not significant. Overall, NYT comments contained the least
proportion of swear, informal, and sexual words among the three groups of comments.


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:10                                                                                          E. H. M. Rho et al.

Thus, in examining the linguistic attributes of comments in RQ1, we discovered that the
comments from far-left and alt-right sites exhibit greater use of informal language, profanity, and
words related to anger & sex, compared to those from the mainstream publisher. What is
interesting is that there are no differences in the proportions of swear words and informal speech
between the far-left and alt-right sites. However, comments from the Breitbart site (the alt-right)
are the angriest, most emotional (positive and negative) and sexual compared to the comments
from the other two publishers.

5.2 RQ2: What are the differences in the semantic contexts in which #MeToo is
framed across discussion from the three politically distinct news sources?
In this section, we present results from the word embedding analyses using word2vec to analyze
semantic context. Our findings show that the top words most semantically associated with
“MeToo” is noticeably different across the three news sources. In Table 4, we show the 25 tokens
semantically closest to the word “MeToo” based on cosine similarity values from the three
embedding models.

   Table 4. Top 25 word embedding tokens most similar to the word “MeToo” based on cosine
 similarity values. Three embedding models were built separately for DemNow, NYT & Breitbart

           Democracy Now                           New York Times                             Breitbart
     word         cosine similarity           word        cosine similarity          word          cosine similarity
    metoo               1.000               metoo              1.000               metoo                1.000
      fame              0.887              hashtag             0.906                whore               0.942
 movements              0.874                group             0.838               always               0.940
    society             0.845             campaign             0.819                 joke               0.937
    money               0.834               silence            0.807                 paid               0.934
   ignored              0.798              courage             0.807                  tell              0.933
  predators             0.795                 ones             0.798                stupid              0.925
   famous               0.792                giving            0.795                 must               0.925
 hollywood              0.768                names             0.780                  list              0.923
       rich             0.767                 takes            0.775                expect              0.922
  standing              0.766                  read            0.750               morals               0.917
     thank              0.766               respect            0.743                  day               0.917
     times              0.758                  past            0.739                  boy               0.913
   agenda               0.748              breakers            0.734                 back               0.911
    choice              0.742                share             0.724              movement              0.907
   cultural             0.737               instead            0.717                makes               0.904
  seriously             0.736               stories            0.712                   ok               0.904
      least             0.736              sharing             0.712                 guys               0.903
    profile             0.733                choice            0.699                office              0.901
  assholes              0.732                name              0.696               actually             0.901
        act             0.732             magazine             0.693              hypocrite             0.899
     sorry              0.730                white             0.692                 best               0.898
prostitution            0.728                  help            0.685              anything              0.896
conversation            0.724                  call            0.676                figure              0.896
  knowing               0.718                brave             0.657                people              0.889
Each embedding model was separately built from the corpora of DemNow, NYT and Breitbart
comments. The cosine similarity values listed in descending order in Table 4 indicate the


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                               28:11

similarity of angles between each vectorized token and the word “MeToo”, ranging from 1
(identical) to -1 (absolute opposites).
The embedding results show thematic differences in the linguistic context of how #MeToo is
described and understood among commenters from the three publishers. Among NYT comments,
“MeToo” is semantically closest with tokens such as “hashtag”, “group”, and “campaign” – words
that are somewhat intuitively characteristic of #MeToo as an online social movement or a
hashtag campaign. Tokens such as “courage”, “respect”, and “brave” are also semantically
associated with the word “MeToo”, suggestive of the emotive context in which NYT commenters
describe content related to the hashtag. Action words such as “giving”, “take”, “read”, “share”,
“help”, and “call” are also often used in relation to “MeToo” in the corpus of NYT comments. By
contrast, the embedding tokens from Breitbart and DemNow comments that are semantically
closest to “MeToo” are somewhat more thematically dispersed. However, it is noticeable that
some of these top tokens, such as “whore”, “stupid”, and “hypocrite” from Breitbart and
“assholes” from DemNow have clear negative connotations. Top DemNow tokens, such as
“fame”, “money”, “famous” and “rich” and perhaps "hollywood" are also linguistically related to
socioeconomic status.
To more deeply examine the differences in the semantic context of these tokens in relation to the
keyword, “MeToo”, we present a discussion of selected quotes from the comments. We present
examples focusing on the top tokens that reflect clear thematic patterns and nuances around how
#MeToo is discussed among commenters based on its larger semantic framing across the three
news sites.
5.2.1 New York Times – “hashtag”, “group”. Among NYT comments, the token “MeToo” is often
referred to as a hashtag. As it is the case with online hashtag movements, the brevity of a hashtag
phrase that goes viral is indeed effective, but can also be confusing in meaning, due to its
pervasive use across social media users in multiple contexts that can change and evolve over
time. Compared to Breitbart and DemNow commenters there is a greater number of NYT
commenters who hint confusion, but also greater willingness to understand and engage in
discussion as to what the hashtag represents. In one of the NYT article posts, one commenter,
Jim, expressed confusion towards what the “MeToo” hashtag stood for:
    “Not trying to start fights, but metoo is hard to understand…To my understanding, sexual
    harassment can be something as simple as a catcall on the street. So I guess my question is are all
    instances of misconduct, both verbal and physical a part of metoo, or is it women who have been
    assaulted and abused?”
In response to Jim, another commenter replied:
    “Jim, the #metoo hashtag is intended to capture all of those instances. However, I think you will
    find that stories like the ones these women are telling are not as uncommon as most people would
    like to believe… When I finally started talking to other women about my rape, I was shocked and
    dismayed to find how many of them (my friends, women I had known for years) had very similar
    stories to tell. #MeToo”
Here, the commenter discusses “MeToo” in the context of a hashtag by explaining the purpose of
its use and the spectrum of what the hashtag encompasses (“to capture all of those instances" of
what #MeToo stands for). The commenter also refers to the functional aspects of the hashtag by
hinting its affordance to highlight the pervasiveness of an issue (“stories…these women are
telling are not as uncommon”). Furthermore, the commenter also uses the MeToo hashtag as it


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:12                                                                                          E. H. M. Rho et al.

has been used by others by signing off her comment with “#MeToo” after mentioning her own
personal experience (“my rape”).
The token “group” is the second closest word semantically associated with “MeToo” in the
context of this NYT use-case as demonstrated in the following example. Throughout our analysis
of NYT comments, there were numerous commenters, like the example from above, who used the
comment threads below the article to briefly mention or share personal experiences of sexual
harassment and assault with others. However, unlike personal Facebook posts where one can
adjust the privacy settings to customize audience visibility, article posts shared by the publishers
are all public, including the comment threads where any Facebook user can see or reply to what
others wrote. Hence, in order to steer personal experiences into a less visible and more private
space, some commenters invite others into “MeToo” groups. Thus, the context of the token
"group" here refers to persons taking action related to the " MeToo " topic:
    “#MeToo i have too many stories to write. I started a #MeToo group for all survivors.”
5.2.2 Breitbart – “joke”, “whore”, “always”. The context in which “MeToo” is discussed among
Breitbart commenters strongly contrasts with the tone in which NYT commenters talk about the
survivors or those associated with the movement. For example, the token “MeToo” is often
referred to as a “joke”, the second highest embedding token from the model, as this quote makes
clear:
    "MeToo is a huge joke, so is Holly weird and mainstream media – no use for any of them."
In response to a Breitbart article, in which the sub-headline read, “The #MeToo movement sought
to remove those in Hollywood who have been accused or found guilty of rape and sexual assault.
Instead, they just gave one of them an Oscar”, one commenter responded:
    "Always a pleasure to hear a lecture from someone, that literally bought and paid his way out of a
    rape charge, lecture others. #MeToo what a joke."
Most Breitbart coverage of the #MeToo movement shared through its Facebook page contained
headlines and post texts with strong insinuations that seem to undermine the general purpose of
the #MeToo movement. Unsurprisingly, this caters and feeds well to its Facebook audience who
also commonly refer to #MeToo participants as “whores”:
    “METOO has no meaning. Finding out they all are a bunch of hussie whores looking for cash.
    They all need to get out on the street corner and get their cash. Maybe 10% have a legitimate
    complaint.”
Furthermore, Breitbart commenters often use linguistic absolutes, such as “always” in their
comments:
    “Because a lot of #metoo is about fake idiot liars looking for profit and control, hence it’s always
    the "powerful" males they name… Naming little schleppy nobody will get them nothing. But
    when it’s profitable to suck up to them or on them they are still willing to do that too. Whatever
    happened…she was a profit seeking slutty little whore. Can’t believe he fell for it.”
Here, the commenter generalizes how it is “always” the powerful that #MeToo participants
accuse rather than those who are less well-known. This shifts the context of the #MeToo
movement from a campaign of sharing experiences to one purposed to name accusers.
5.2.3 Democracy Now – “fame”, “money”, “rich”. On DemNow comment threads, “MeToo” is
often semantically associated with words like “fame”, “money”, and “rich” where commenters
often discuss the #MeToo movement in relation to race and socioeconomic status:
    “I was more than insulted listening online this morning to Oprah compare the violent and brutal
    pain of rapes and even murders that Black women endured by racist white men during Jim Crow


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                               28:13

    to that of rich white women in Hollywood and business. The brutal gang rape of Recy Taylor by
    six white men in Alabama is not comparable to the alleged sexual assaults that rich white women
    (often times purposely endured for fame and money) are fighting in their new #TimesUp and
    #MeToo movements. To compare the savagery and racism that fueled the many rapes and abuse
    that Black women had to endure by the hands of racist white men to that of rich white women’s
    new fight for dominance and power is a shameful erasure, even for Oprah. These rich women
    weren’t raped, beaten, bloodied and left to die because of hate and white power, these rich women
    chose silence out of fear of their careers and wealth, Black women who chose silence during Jim
    Crow etc., chose silence out of fear for their very lives and that of their families.”
Here, the commenter takes a strong partial stance by using language that villainizes the
experiences of one group (rich white women) over those of others (Black women). The
commenter makes generalized assumptions on race and socioeconomic identities, claiming that
“alleged sexual assaults that rich white women” experience are often “purposely endured for
fame and money”. This kind of discourse with strong partial references to race and
socioeconomic identities is heavily echoed throughout DemNow comments as it will be further
shown in the findings.
In summary, the top tokens that are semantically associated with “MeToo” show noticeable
thematic differences. This suggests that the framing of discussion around #MeToo is different as
shown through the different words that are semantically closest to the hashtag. That said,
commenters can understandably react to #MeToo or related-topics in different ways depending
on how the hashtag is presented across the three publishers. In other words, potential different
framing biases [42, 43, 75] around the MeToo hashtag can elicit different cognitive prejudices
related to the movement, manifest in the discussion among commenters of these politically
distinct news sites.

5.3 RQ2: What kind of rhetorical patterns are observed from the discussion of
the most important keywords across the three politically distinct news sources?
To analyze rhetorical patterns based on important keywords, we first needed to identify the key
tokens discussed among commenters from DemNow, NYT, and Breitbart Facebook article posts
on #MeToo. We conducted two TF-IDF analyses – first on the combined corpus of Breitbart and
NYT comments and second, on the corpus of DemNow and NYT comments. Our TF-IDF results
show that commenters from DemNow and Breitbart tend to focus on sexual subject matters
while NYT commenters are more topically focused on the nuance of events related to the online
movement as well as experiences shared through the #MeToo movement.
5.3.1 Important keywords across the three politically distinct news sites. In Figures 3 and 4 we
show the top 40 linguistic tokens in descending order of their TF-IDF weights from Breitbart and
NYT, and from DemNow and NYT analyses, respectively. We first describe the keyword results
before presenting findings from the discourse analysis.
Comments from Breitbart & DemNow are topically focused on sex. Of the top 40 words with
the highest TF-IDF weights for Breitbart in Figure 3, nearly three-fourths of the tokens are either
swear- or sexual words, consistent with the results from the LIWC analysis. Similar to the list of
Breitbart tokens, almost half of the top 40 DemNow tokens shown in Figure 4 are also either
expletives or words related to sexual profanity. In fact, the 12 overlapping tokens between
Breitbart and DemNow TF-IDF are: “sex”, “whores”, “ass”, “pussy”, “bullshit”, “fuck”, “fucking”,
“asshole”, “assholes”, “dick”, “bitch, and “penis”. Tokens from Breitbart comments contain


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:14                                                                                          E. H. M. Rho et al.

degenerative expressions such as “libtard”, “douche”, “prick”, “jackass” as well as those more
specific to women (“whores”, “slut”, “bitches”, “prostitute”, “skank”). Furthermore, Breitbart and
DemNow tokens suggest that comments from both the alt-right and far-left coverage on #MeToo
tend to be topically focused on aspects related to sexual profanity based on the frequent
references to both male and female body parts (“ass”, “asshole”, “dick”, “penis”, “balls”, “vaginas”).


 Fig. 3. Top 40 tokens in descending order of their TF-IDF weights based on a TF-IDF analysis of
                   Breitbart & New York Times comments on #MeToo articles.

Comments from NYT focus on experience & nuance. By contrast, NYT tokens are more
semantically nuanced in reference to sex: “flirting”, “advances”, “dating”, “relationships”,
“touched”, “knee” as shown in Figure 4. In fact, each list of the top 40 NYT tokens from both TFIDF results do not contain any profanity or sexual references to women. Instead, the linguistic
tokens are suggestive of aspects related to people’s experience, context, or discourse around the
topic of #MeToo as well as the various perspectives and quality of perspectives surrounding
issues related to the topic as shown in Table 5.
While all articles from the three publishers are topically focused on events surrounding the
#MeToo movement, the TF-IDF results clearly resonate strong differences in important keywords
discussed among commenters. This suggests that it may be challenging for political discourse


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                               28:15

surrounding important social topics (as embodied by the #MeToo movement) to topically
converge among those who consume news sources that are highly distinct in political
orientation. In the next section, we present the context in which the top TF-IDF tokens are
discussed by the commenters in greater depth.


 Fig. 4. Top 40 tokens in descending order of their TF-IDF weights based on a TF-IDF analysis of
                Democracy Now & New York Times comments on #MeToo articles.


 Table 5. Categorization of NYT tokens from the two TF-IDF results (mutual tokens are bolded).

      Experience           Context           Discourse         Perspectives         Quality of Perspectives
    “experiences”         “context”          “discussed”         “norms”                  “societal”
      “survivor”          “nuance”            “justify”         “attitudes”            “generational”
      “occurred”         “language”         “suggesting”          “views”                “pervasive”
                          “degrees”         “expression”      “assumption”             “internalized”
                        “spectrum”                              “mentality”             “convinced”
                                                               “judgement”       “recognized”/ “recognize”
                                                              “compassion”


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:16                                                                                          E. H. M. Rho et al.

5.3.2 Rhetorical patterns using important keywords. To investigate the various rhetorical
patterns observed in discussion among commenters, we draw examples from the data in which
the top TF-IDF tokens are expressed in the comments. Findings from our discourse analyses, as
shown in the selected examples from our data, demonstrate similarities in rhetorical style
between DemNow and Breitbart commenters. Commenters on the far-left and alt-right sites both
exhibit discourse behavior that subverts a particular social group and fragments solidarity of the
movement based on racial and socioeconomic statuses.
Breitbart comments tend to dehumanize one group. Among the top 40 Breitbart tokens, the
word “sex” has the highest TF-IDF weight. Breitbart commenters use the token most commonly
to describe how the #MeToo movement is about women using sex to advance their careers:
    "Isn’t this how the whole #MeToo movement got started? Have sex in exchange for what you
    want.”
The token “sex” is often used when #MeToo participants are framed in the context of
participating in or encouraging their own sexual abuse, or what the commenter below would
describe as engaging in “prostitution” to “further their career”:
    "I have ZERO respect for women who participated in the sexual abuse in exchange to further their
    career and now are crying me too. That is not sex abuse, that is called prostitution."
Breitbart commenters also often bring up the notion of whether #MeToo experiences truly
entailed “forcible sex”, often defining those that can be considered legitimate “MeToo” incidents
as “rape” or life-threatening situations where victims would have had to understandably choose
forced sex in order to have saved their lives at knife- or gunpoint:
    “So you sleep around…and then 20 or 30 years later decide to say you were harassed or made to
    have sex. Did any claim rape? Did they have a gun or knife held to their throats? How does one
    claim they were forced to have sex? I'd just like to know."
In these examples, it is evident that Breitbart commenters are bringing in strong prior beliefs
about the legitimacy of victim status in sexual encounters. These data reveal a prevailing attitude
that #MeToo stories are illegitimate statements of harassment. Further, there is a sense that
commenters see themselves as exposing hypocrisy in the movement by suggesting those who
have come forward are weak, manipulative, and untrustworthy individuals who are, across the
board, using harassment complaints for personal gain. These commenters mostly criticize the
#MeToo movement and its participants for encouraging women to fabricate their narratives of
sexual abuse. The criticisms are usually accompanied by the commenters’ own assumptions
around what they consider legitimate sexual abuse or harassment.
DemNow comments tend to promote social fragmentation based on race. Among the top 40
DemNow tokens, the word “color” has the highest TF-IDF weight. “Color” is an important
keyword frequently mentioned among commenters who often argue over which race is excluded
or included in the #MeToo narrative:
    "That's true! It's largely a bunch of fed up white women in #MeToo."
One commenter echoes agreement, arguing the #MeToo conversation is primarily focused on
those who are racially and socioeconomically privileged:
    "Yes…women of color and working-class women are especially vulnerable, but the #metoo
    conversation is primarily with regard to upper class white women."
Here, the commenter may be making a valid point on the importance of recognizing
intersectional identities. However, the comment also serves to ‘other’ those who have come forth


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                               28:17

by suggesting that some women are garnering attention based on race and socioeconomic status.
In response to a DemNow interview article on Tarana Burke, one Facebook commenter criticizes
the #MeToo founder for “making it about racism”:
    "OMG, Stop already. Nobody is being excluded. Since when did using the word "women" mean
    just white women or whatever perceived persecution she sees? I thought we were talking about
    ALL women…Did someone go out there and say, ‘this conversation is strictly limited to white
    women’? She's CHANGING the discourse now and making it about racism and exclusion of
    people of color because SHE'S doing that…The Time cover I'm looking at has a black woman
    squarely in the FRONT of the group…So where is the exclusion?”
Ironically, the DemNow commenter criticizes the focus on race by using race as rhetoric: “The
Time cover…has a black woman squarely in the FRONT…So where is the exclusion?”. The
comment exhibits a form of discourse that emphasizes social fragmentation based on race,
stripping away empathy towards understanding others’ experiences. While not blaming the
victim based on the same criteria as those posting comments on Breitbart stories, such
generalizing and othering emerges as a striking rhetorical similarity in how each of the
polarizing venues differs from the mainstream.
NYT comments encourage perspective-taking, informing, & educating others. The word
with the highest TF-IDF weight in the list of NYT tokens from the NYT-Breitbart TF-IDF result
was “experiences”. While Breitbart comments largely expressed judgments about others who had
come forth with #MeToo stories, NYT comments often contain descriptions of the commenters’
own experiences. Taking the position of one’s own experience, these comments are written in
style of personal disclosure and empathy. Such comments are framed to inform, encouraging
others to take victims seriously and withhold generalized perspectives. An NYT article headlined,
“Catherine Deneuve and Others Denounce the #MeToo Movement” was posted by the NYT
Facebook page with the following Facebook post text: “Catherine Deneuve and others disapprove
of #MeToo for punishing men when ‘the only thing they did wrong was touching a knee, trying
to steal a kiss, or speaking about ‘intimate’ things at a work dinner or sending messages with
sexual connotations.’” In response, one commenter wrote:
    "It’s not just a knee touch or sexual comments made in the work place! It’s the entire experience
    of discomfort or guilt that you may have unknowingly somehow led that male on. It happened to
    me. My coworker and I became close friends, but he took it further, thinking I was flirting and
    hinting I would welcome his advances. I spent MONTHS being uncomfortable in a job that was
    my dream job otherwise. And when I finally DID address it, I was let go and he got to stay,
    because he had tenure, and no one witnessed his behavior (we often worked alone in a lab
    together). It’s not a witch hunt. Each situation should be heard and judged independently, and
    NOT solely on your own harassment experiences-or lack of them."
Here, the commenter shares a personal experience in an attempt to provide context around why
certain incidents that some might consider harmless can be an injuring experience with
significant consequences for others. The focus of this comment highlights the fact that incidents
of sexual harassment are more complicated than the description of concrete acts (“just a knee
touch or sexual comments”) that have occurred. Rather than defining whether a certain act is and
is not legitimate sexual harassment, the commenter here focuses on how the experience made her
feel, encouraging others that “each situation should be heard and judged independently” rather
than generalized.
The token “experiences” is also used in the context of informing and educating others on the
topic of sexual abuse and harassment:


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:18                                                                                          E. H. M. Rho et al.

    “Keep in mind that many who have been assaulted began their experiences as children, or
    preteens/teens, setting them on a path to later engage in relationships that would further subject
    them to more assaults. The words "me, too" often do not equate to one single event of sexual
    harassment or assault, but years and even decades of such events by several perpetrators. The
    struggle to recover from this can last a lifetime."
The discussion prompted by the articles encourages some NYT commenters to remind readers
that the point of the #MeToo movement is about “Listening…to put aside your prejudices and just
be present to others in pain” of their experiences. Some NYT commenters warn others not to
“categorically deny other women’s experiences” or put the burden on #MeToo participants to
“explain away their personal experiences in some broad manner”. As such, whether the token
“experience” is used in the context to describe one’s own or others’, many NYT comments focus
on informing and sharing the experience of sexual harassment and abuse rather than
generalizing and demonizing those who have come forth.
From the TF-IDF analysis of DemNOW and NYT comments, the word “flirting” had the highest
TF-IDF weight in the list of NYT tokens. Among NYT commenters, there was a lot of discussion
over the nuances that separated flirting from sexual harassment. For example, one commenter
makes a distinction by providing situational context to her perspective:
    "Touching my knee, going in for a kiss, and flirting are NOT harassment or assault. They might
    be inappropriate/harassment depending on context (i.e. one person is a teacher and the other is a
    student). I don’t mind a man doing any of those things I listed, even if I’m not interested. The
    problem is if he continues when I’ve made it clear it’s unwanted attention."
Another NYT commenter offers a discussion around how definitions need to be re-evaluated as
they can evolve with time and encourages perspective-taking across generations:
    "The world is changing. What was "flirting" and "just having a little fun" a decade or so ago is
    being re-evaluated. The definitions of sexual assault have changed - they're tighter, now. Society
    evolves, and #MeToo has kindled a flare-up of awareness and of reaction. It isn't simply my
    parents' generation that has to rethink some aspects of casual behavior, it's mine, too."
NYT commenters also express the need for perspective-taking across culture when talking about
what is considered harmless flirting. In response to a lengthy discussion among several NYT
commenters on a French actress’s infamous critique of the #MeToo movement, one commenter
argues that the critique warrants a deeper cultural understanding even though she personally
disagrees with the actress:
    "American living in France here. I have come across many French women who feel this way, and it
    does not surprise me. I feel like it’s a very big part of the macho culture here. When I first moved
    here I was shocked by things said in commercials on regular TV channels during the middle of the
    day that kids can see, the manner men talk to women and the racist jokes that are just culturally
    acceptable. A lot of the older women and younger women I speak to are scared of losing this
    macho man culture, men open doors for then, whistling at them, [because some] enjoy it. Whereas
    others including myself, am not flattered by a cat call. But this is why it is up to us to speak up in
    the moment and say we are uncomfortable with what is happening. Some women want and enjoy
    using their femininity as power and more power to them! Others do not. And that does not make
    one wrong or right. As mentioned above by [previous commenter’s name] the difference is
    someone in power flirting/stealing kisses/placing hands on knees and using this power over the
    person and it’s up to us the person receiving these gestures to openly question this behavior and
    speak up if we are not comfortable with it."
Here, the commenter uses expressions such as “I feel like” and “I was shocked” in sharing her
own experience of living in France as a way to provide other commenters, a better


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                               28:19

contextualization to the actress’s critique in the original article shared on the NYT Facebook
page. In addition to sharing her own experience, the commenter emphasizes reflection and
acknowledgement of other people’s experiences, noting that the different perspectives people
have therefore “does not make one wrong or right”.
In summary, findings from our discourse analysis demonstrate strong stylistic differences as well
as similarities in rhetorical engagement based on the three politically distinct groups embodied
by the DemNow, NYT, and Breitbart comments. Research has shown that online users tend to
converge to one another’s communicative behavior [39]; in other words, commenters in the same
discussion group are likely to parrot each other’s rhetorical manner in online conversation. This
could in turn, amplify both positive (informing, educating, and perspective-taking) and negative
(generalization, dehumanization, and social fragmentation) impacts as shown through our
analysis. We discuss further implications in greater depth in the next section.

6 DISCUSSION

6.1 Affective Language & Heuristic Processing
Heuristic processing, which involves making quick judgments about the information one comes
across rather than engaging in deep reflection or discussion with others before coming to a
conclusion [127], is particularly salient to social media consumption [70, 92, 130]. Content related
to politics is not an exception [91]. Researchers have shown that users often rely on cognitive
shortcuts and heuristic cues to evaluate political comments on social media [74]. Moreover,
research has shown that when people engage in heuristic processing of political information
online, negative emotional words induce more negative conclusions on the topic of discussion
[74, 91, 147]. Hence, a deluge of comments charged with negative emotions (negative affect,
swear words, anger, sexual profanity) can create a strong negativity bias [6, 25, 137, 146, 147]
towards the subject of discourse. Our work supports these findings while also suggesting that
different venues appear to play a key role in the form of the emotional weight and rhetorical
style in commenting behavior.
Research has also shown that when political information is communicated using negative
emotional words, people are able to recall that information more easily [147]. In other words,
using language laden with negative affect makes a longer-lasting impression on people’s
memory, potentially allowing certain topics to be discussed more disproportionately often among
commenters. This in return, can exacerbate the problems of political echo chambers on SNS [50,
139], biasing the nature of discussion around online news content among commenters.
Our analyses reveal that, compared to NYT commenters, Breitbart and DemNow commenters
tend to use substantially more sexual profanity and curse words that are dehumanizing towards
women. Studies have shown that dehumanizing language leads to negative emotional responses
and attitudes towards the dehumanized group [146]. This prevents openness of understanding
other people’s experiences – a key component of constructive democratic discourse [37].

6.2 Framing Effects and Generalized Perspectives
Framing effects [42, 75] have been a useful concept in understanding the complex facets around
social movements [8, 9, 84], news coverage [84, 124, 125, 129] as well as the formation of political
opinion [42, 90, 102]. A framing effect is a form of cognitive bias, in which people react to a given


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:20                                                                                          E. H. M. Rho et al.

choice in different ways depending on how it is presented [42, 75]. Results from our embedding
analyses showed noticeable differences in the top tokens most commonly associated with
“MeToo” across comments from the three publishers. Such differences imply potential framing
effects [42, 75] around how #MeToo is discussed across commenters consuming news sources
with clear differences in political orientation – at least in our three samples. Furthermore,
discourse analysis and embedding results on Breitbart comments demonstrate that the token
“MeToo” is semantically associated with absolutist expressions, such as “always”. Absolutist
rhetoric is harmful for democratic discourse [12], especially on moral and political topics that
entail a wide spectrum of opinions. Research has shown that generalizing expressions tend to
brush off contrasting perspectives, arguments [80], as well as important facts [80, 81] without
seriously engaging with them – elements characteristic of fake news dissemination [35, 66, 119].
Furthermore, Breitbart comments are often laden with sweeping assumptions about the
definition of sexual harassment and the character of people who have come forth while DemNow
commenters make blanket statements around which group deserves more sympathy in the
#MeToo narrative. Generalized expressions promote dominant viewpoints while marginalizing
minority perspectives and stifling discussion [12, 144], which discourages empathy and sharing
[68, 80, 81, 144]. This may account for why there was a much smaller proportion of Breitbart and
DemNow commenters disclosing personal stories of sexual harassment or #MeToo experiences
compared to NYT commenters in the data.

6.3 In-Group and Out-Group Dynamics
Our analyses reveal strong in-group and out-group dynamics [115, 140, 141] among Breitbart and
DemNow commenters. Breitbart comments portray #MeToo participants as “whores” and “sluts”
who have manipulative sex to advance their careers. This form of out-group derogation [18, 76,
141], or the tendency to have negative views about people not part of one’s own group,
villainizes all survivors of sexual harassment who are using the #MeToo movement as a platform
to share personal stories.
DemNow commenters, on the other hand, exhibit strong in-group favoritism [76, 98, 141] based
on racial and socioeconomic groupings. Commenters frequently argue over how women of color
deserve more attention within the #MeToo movement or that rich, white women are unfairly
hijacking the #MeToo narrative from black women. Such in-group/out-group biases in discussion
could polarize the #MeToo movement and undermine the initial solidarity of those using the
movement to speak out on difficult experiences.

6.4 Summary of Implications
The most surprising insight generated by these data was the structural and rhetorical alignment
between commenters in our selected cases of the far-left and alt-right news sites in relation to the
comments on more mainstream media. The crassness, emotional weight, generalizing, and
othering of these comments were noticeably similar. Media polarization research suggests that
there is likely little to no overlap in the population of individuals consuming the articles in these
different media venues. However, distance from the mainstream appears to foster a particular
interaction pattern in relation to current events. Across the board, the comments in both of these
venues tended to be more absolutist and judgmental in striking contrast to the emotionally
subdued, inclusive, personal, and empathetic comments that proliferated in the mainstream
media. These data suggest that if online media has any chance of fostering democratic dialogue –


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                                 28:21

a discourse in which viewpoints are shared reasonably, assumptions are challenged productively,
and personal experience is used to promote inclusivity – it would not happen at either end of the
political spectrum. This is a hypothesis that can be explored with further research.

6.5 Limitations
Our study has several limitations. First, for our data source, we chose only three sites, which may
not have been representative of the three disparate political views. However, we feel that these
three cases provide a basis for future investigation, in which we will employ a larger sample of
news sources so as to increase generalizability. Furthermore, the number of articles among the
three publishers were different. Breitbart contained the fewest, and New York Times the highest,
number of articles posted on Facebook. While this sheds interesting light in terms of publication
behavior towards #MeToo coverage between the two politically distinct news media, such
difference in the number of articles could have influenced the topical diversity of discussion
among commenters. Another potential limitation is that the tone of the article could have
influenced the tone of the comments. While analyzing the alignment of article and comment
discourse is beyond the scope of the current paper, this can be addressed in future research.
Furthermore, reader demographics could explain the differences among the sites’ comments as
education levels are likely to affect linguistic style. Based on traffic statistics provided by Alexa, a
data analytics company owned by Amazon, readers who went to college and graduate schools are
overrepresented on NYT and DemNow websites [41, 104]. For breitbart.com, the proportion of
those who went to college among its audience are similar to the general Internet population
while those who are graduate degree holders are underrepresented [19]. Furthermore, compared
to the general online population, males are overrepresented at breitbart.com while
underrepresented on nytimes.com and democracynow.com [19, 41, 104].

7 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we use linguistic tools to compare commenting behavior across three politically
distinct news sources covering the #MeToo movement. Through our work, we show that
commenting behavior reflects how topics surrounding an online social movement are framed and
conversed about within a particular political orientation. Our work shows that linguistic style
and affect, as well as rhetorical patterns, can shed light on the underlying factors that influence
civil discourse on social media. Comments from the far-left and alt-right sites that we analyzed
exhibited structural similarities in rhetorical and linguistic patterns that could promote polarizing
viewpoints, while comments from the mainstream site we analyzed tended to encourage
contextual understanding through empathetic discussion. While in our study we examined three
sites of disparate political orientations, we feel that analyses of linguistic patterns can be applied
more broadly to examine a range of different sites and topics to more deeply understand
polarization and entrenchment of views.

REFERENCES
[1]      Albright, J. 2016. The #Election2016 Micro-Propaganda Machine. Jonathan Albright.
[2]      Andrew Perrin 2015. Social Media Usage: 2005-2015.
[3]      Appiah, K.A. 2018. Do I Have to Tell My Father About My #MeToo Experience? The New York
         Times.


 Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:22                                                                                           E. H. M. Rho et al.

[4]      Bakshy, E., Messing, S. and Adamic, L.A. 2015. Exposure to ideologically diverse news and opinion
         on Facebook. Science. 348, 6239 (Jun. 2015), 1130–1132. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa1160.
[5]      Barthel, M. and Mitchell, A. 2017. Americans’ Attitudes About the News Media Deeply Divided Along
         Partisan Lines.
[6]      Baumeister, R.F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C. and Vohs, K.D. 2001. Bad is stronger than good.
         Review of general psychology. 5, 4 (2001), 323.
[7]      Beasley, A. and Mason, W. 2015. Emotional States vs. Emotional Words in Social Media. Proceedings
         of the ACM Web Science Conference (New York, NY, USA, 2015), 31:1–31:10.
[8]      Benford, R.D. 1997. An insider’s critique of the social movement framing perspective. Sociological
         inquiry. 67, 4 (1997), 409–430.
[9]      Benford, R.D. and Snow, D.A. 2000. Framing processes and social movements: An overview and
         assessment. Annual review of sociology. 26, 1 (2000), 611–639.
[10]     Bennett, J. 2018. The #MeToo Moment: Navigating Sex in the ‘Gray Zone.’ The New York Times.
[11]     Bennett, J. 2018. The #MeToo Moment: Parsing the Generational Divide. The New York Times.
[12]     Berger, E. 2014. The Rhetoric of Constitutional Absolutism. William & Mary Law Review. 56, (2015
         2014), 667.
[13]     Bonilla, Y. and Rosa, J. 2015. # Ferguson: Digital protest, hashtag ethnography, and the racial politics
         of social media in the United States. American Ethnologist. 42, 1 (2015), 4–17.
[14]     Bonos, L. 2017. Analysis | Not everyone with a #MeToo is posting their story. Here’s why some are
         refraining. Washington Post.
[15]     Booten, K. 2016. Hashtag Drift: Tracing the Evolving Uses of Political Hashtags Over Time.
         Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY,
         USA, 2016), 2401–2405.
[16]     Boulis, C. and Ostendorf, M. 2005. A Quantitative Analysis of Lexical Differences Between Genders
         in Telephone Conversations. Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on Association for
         Computational Linguistics (Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2005), 435–442.
[17]     Boutyline, A. and Willer, R. 2017. The social structure of political echo chambers: Variation in
         ideological homophily in online networks. Political Psychology. 38, 3 (2017), 551–569.
[18]     Branscombe, N.R. and Wann, D.L. 1994. Collective self-esteem consequences of outgroup derogation
         when a valued social identity is on trial. European Journal of Social Psychology. 24, 6 (1994), 641–657.
[19]     Breitbart.com          Traffic,      Demographics           and       Competitors         -       Alexa:
         https://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/breitbart.com. Accessed: 2018-04-19.
[20]     Brubaker, J.R., Kivran-Swaine, F., Taber, L. and Hayes, G.R. 2012. Grief-Stricken in a Crowd: The
         Language of Bereavement and Distress in Social Media. ICWSM (2012).
[21]     Bruns, A. and Burgess, J.E. 2011. The use of Twitter hashtags in the formation of ad hoc publics.
         Proceedings of the 6th European Consortium for Political Research (ECPR) General Conference 2011
         (University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Aug. 2011).
[22]     Bucholtz, M. and Hall, K. 2005. Identity and interaction: a sociocultural linguistic approach.
         Discourse Studies. 7, 4–5 (Oct. 2005), 585–614. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/1461445605054407.
[23]     Cacciatore, M.A., Scheufele, D.A. and Iyengar, S. 2016. The End of Framing as we Know it … and the
         Future of Media Effects. Mass Communication and Society. 19, 1 (Jan. 2016), 7–23. DOI:
         https://doi.org/10.1080/15205436.2015.1068811.
[24]     Carney, N. 2016. All Lives Matter, but so Does Race: Black Lives Matter and the Evolving Role of
         Social     Media.      Humanity      &     Society.   40,     2    (May     2016),    180–199.      DOI:
         https://doi.org/10.1177/0160597616643868.
[25]     Cavazza, N. and Guidetti, M. 2014. Swearing in Political Discourse: Why Vulgarity Works. Journal
         of     Language      and      Social   Psychology.     33,    5    (Oct.    2014),    537–547.      DOI:
         https://doi.org/10.1177/0261927X14533198.
[26]     Chancellor, S., Hu, A. and De Choudhury, M. 2018. Norms Matter: Contrasting Social Support
         Around Behavior Change in Online Weight Loss Communities. Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
         Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA, 2018), 666:1–666:14.


 Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                                28:23

[27]    Chen, Y.-Y., Chen, T., Hsu, W.H., Liao, H.-Y.M. and Chang, S.-F. 2014. Predicting Viewer Affective
        Comments Based on Image Content in Social Media. Proceedings of International Conference on
        Multimedia Retrieval (New York, NY, USA, 2014), 233:233–233:240.
[28]    Cheng, J., Bernstein, M., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C. and Leskovec, J. 2017. Anyone Can Become a
        Troll: Causes of Trolling Behavior in Online Discussions. (Feb. 2017). DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998213.
[29]    Chira, S. 2018. Numbers Hint at Why #MeToo Took Off: The Sheer Number Who Can Say Me Too.
        The New York Times.
[30]    Chira, S. and Einhorn, C. 2017. The #MeToo Moment: Blue-Collar Women Ask, ‘What About Us?’
        The New York Times.
[31]    Chokshi, N. 2016. How #BlackLivesMatter Came to Define a Movement. The New York Times.
[32]    Codrea-Rado, A. 2018. Catherine Deneuve Apologizes to Victims after Denouncing #MeToo. The
        New York Times.
[33]    Codrea-Rado, A. 2017. #MeToo Floods Social Media With Stories of Harassment and Assault. The
        New York Times.
[34]    Colleoni, E., Rozza, A. and Arvidsson, A. 2014. Echo chamber or public sphere? Predicting political
        orientation and measuring political homophily in Twitter using big data. Journal of Communication.
        64, 2 (2014), 317–332.
[35]    Conroy, N.J., Rubin, V.L. and Chen, Y. 2015. Automatic deception detection: Methods for finding
        fake news. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology. 52, 1 (2015), 1–4.
[36]    Cooney, S. 2018. “They Don’t Want to Include Women Like Me.” Sex Workers Say They’re Being
        Left Out of the #MeToo Movement. Time.
[37]    Dahlberg, L. 2001. The Internet and democratic discourse: Exploring the prospects of online
        deliberative forums extending the public sphere. Information, Communication & Society. 4, 4 (2001),
        615–633.
[38]    Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., Cheng, J., Kleinberg, J. and Lee, L. 2012. You Had Me at Hello: How
        Phrasing Affects Memorability. Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for
        Computational Linguistics: Long Papers - Volume 1 (Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2012), 892–901.
[39]    Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., Gamon, M. and Dumais, S. 2011. Mark My Words!: Linguistic Style
        Accommodation in Social Media. Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web
        (New York, NY, USA, 2011), 745–754.
[40]    De Choudhury, M., Counts, S. and Horvitz, E. 2013. Predicting postpartum changes in emotion and
        behavior via social media. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
        Systems (2013), 3267–3276.
[41]    Democracynow.org           Traffic,       Demographics         and       Competitors        -       Alexa:
        https://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/democracynow.org. Accessed: 2018-04-19.
[42]    Druckman, J.N. 2001. Evaluating framing effects. Journal of Economic Psychology. 22, 1 (Feb. 2001),
        91–101. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-4870(00)00032-5.
[43]    Druckman, J.N. 2001. Using Credible Advice to Overcome Framing Effects. The Journal of Law,
        Economics, and Organization. 17, 1 (Apr. 2001), 62–82. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/jleo/17.1.62.
[44]    Duggan, M. and Smith, A. 2016. The Political Environment on Social Media.
[45]    Entman, R.M. and Usher, N. 2018. Framing in a Fractured Democracy: Impacts of Digital
        Technology on Ideology, Power and Cascading Network Activation. Journal of Communication. 68,
        2 (2018), 298–308.
[46]    Firth, J.R. 1957. A synopsis of linguistic theory, 1930-1955. Studies in Linguistic Analysis. (1957).
[47]    Garber, M. 2014. The Difference Between Ferguson and #Ferguson. The Atlantic.
[48]    Garcia, S. 2017. The Woman Who Created #MeToo Long Before Hashtags. The New York Times.
[49]    Garrett R. Kelly 2009. Politically Motivated Reinforcement Seeking: Reframing the Selective
        Exposure Debate. Journal of Communication. 59, 4 (Dec. 2009), 676–699. DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.2009.01452.x.


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:24                                                                                          E. H. M. Rho et al.

[50]    Garrett, R.K. 2009. Echo chambers online?: Politically motivated selective exposure among Internet
        news users. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 14, 2 (Jan. 2009), 265–285. DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2009.01440.x.
[51]    Gee, J.P. 2014. An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method. Routledge.
[52]    Gill, A.J., French, R.M., Gergle, D. and Oberlander, J. 2008. The Language of Emotion in Short Blog
        Texts. Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (New York,
        NY, USA, 2008), 299–302.
[53]    Golbeck, J., Ash, S. and Cabrera, N. 2017. Hashtags as online communities with social support: A
        study of anti-sexism-in-science hashtag movements. First Monday. 22, 9 (Sep. 2017). DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v22i9.7572.
[54]    Gottweis, H. and Prainsack, B. 2006. Emotion in political discourse: contrasting approaches to stem
        cell governance in the USA, UK, Israel and Germany. Regenerative Medicine. 1, 6 (Nov. 2006), 823–
        829. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2217/17460751.1.6.823.
[55]    Grieco, E. 2017. More Americans are turning to multiple social media sites for news.
[56]    Gumperz John J. 2011. Linguistic and Social Interaction in Two Communities1. American
        Anthropologist.           66,       6_PART2           (Feb.        2011),        137–153.        DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1525/aa.1964.66.suppl_3.02a00100.
[57]    Hadgu, A.T., Garimella, K. and Weber, I. 2013. Political Hashtag Hijacking in the U.S. Proceedings of
        the 22Nd International Conference on World Wide Web (New York, NY, USA, 2013), 55–56.
[58]    Halberstam, Y. and Knight, B. 2016. Homophily, group size, and the diffusion of political
        information in social networks: Evidence from Twitter. Journal of Public Economics. 143, (Nov.
        2016), 73–88. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2016.08.011.
[59]    Harlow, S. 2012. Social media and social movements: Facebook and an online Guatemalan justice
        movement that moved offline. New Media & Society. 14, 2 (Mar. 2012), 225–243. DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444811410408.
[60]    Hartocollis, A. 2018. The #MeToo Moment: When Mothers and Daughters Talk #MeToo. The New
        York Times.
[61]    Herrman, J. 2016. Inside Facebook’s (Totally Insane, Unintentionally Gigantic, Hyperpartisan)
        Political-Media Machine. The New York Times.
[62]    Iyengar, S. and Hahn, K.S. 2009. Red media, blue media: Evidence of ideological selectivity in media
        use. Journal of Communication. 59, 1 (2009), 19–39.
[63]    Jackson, S.J., Bailey, M. and Foucault Welles, B. 2017. # GirlsLikeUs: Trans advocacy and community
        building online. New Media & Society. (2017), 1461444817709276.
[64]    Jackson, S.J. and Foucault Welles, B. 2016. # Ferguson is everywhere: initiators in emerging
        counterpublic networks. Information, Communication & Society. 19, 3 (2016), 397–418.
[65]    Jackson, S.J. and Foucault Welles, B. 2015. Hijacking# myNYPD: Social media dissent and networked
        counterpublics. Journal of Communication. 65, 6 (2015), 932–952.
[66]    Janna, erson and Rainie, L. 2017. The Future of Truth and Misinformation Online.
[67]    Kahn, C. 2018. Mexico’s #MeToo Faces Backlash After Celebrities Air Accusations Of Rape And Assault.
[68]    Kalmoe, N.P. 2014. Fueling the Fire: Violent Metaphors, Trait Aggression, and Support for Political
        Violence.       Political     Communication.      31,     4     (Oct.     2014),     545–563.    DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1080/10584609.2013.852642.
[69]    Kitzie, V. and Ghosh, D. 2015. #Criming and #Alive: Network and Content Analysis of Two Sides of
        a Story on Twitter. Proceedings of the 78th ASIS&T Annual Meeting: Information Science with Impact:
        Research in and for the Community (Silver Springs, MD, USA, 2015), 41:1–41:10.
[70]    Koh, Y.J. and Sundar, S.S. 2010. Heuristic versus systematic processing of specialist versus generalist
        sources in online media. Human Communication Research. 36, 2 (2010), 103–124.
[71]    Kou, Y., Kow, Y.M., Gui, X. and Cheng, W. 2017. One Social Movement, Two Social Media Sites: A
        Comparative Study of Public Discourses. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW). 26, 4–6
        (2017), 807–836.


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                                28:25

[72]    Landler, M. 2018. Trump, Saying ‘Mere Allegation’ Ruins Lives, Appears to Doubt #MeToo
        Movement. The New York Times.
[73]    Lawrence, E., Sides, J. and Farrell, H. 2010. Self-segregation or deliberation? Blog readership,
        participation, and polarization in American politics. Perspectives on Politics. 8, 1 (2010), 141–157.
[74]    Lee, J. and Pingree, R.J. 2016. Cues about Cues in Political Comments on Social Media: Effects of
        Commenters’ Attractiveness and Claims of Cognitive Effort. The Journal of Social Media in Society.
        5, 3 (Dec. 2016), 92–120.
[75]    Levin, I.P., Schneider, S.L. and Gaeth, G.J. 1998. All Frames Are Not Created Equal: A Typology and
        Critical Analysis of Framing Effects. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 76, 2
        (Nov. 1998), 149–188. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1998.2804.
[76]    Levin, S. and Sidanius, J. 1999. Social dominance and social identity in the United States and Israel:
        Ingroup favoritism or outgroup derogation? Political Psychology. 20, 1 (1999), 99–126.
[77]    Lin, Y.-R., Margolin, D., Keegan, B., Baronchelli, A. and Lazer, D. 2013. #Bigbirds Never Die:
        Understanding Social Dynamics of Emergent Hashtag. arXiv:1303.7144 [physics]. (Mar. 2013).
[78]    Loza, S. Hashtag Feminism, #SolidarityIsForWhiteWomen, and the Other #FemFuture. Ada: A
        Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology. 5. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7264/N337770V.
[79]    March, D.S. and Graham, R. 2015. Exploring implicit ingroup and outgroup bias toward Hispanics.
        Group      Processes    & Intergroup          Relations.    18,     1  (Jan.    2015),    89–103.     DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1177/1368430214542256.
[80]    Marietta, M. 2012. The politics of sacred rhetoric: Absolutist appeals and political persuasion. Baylor
        University Press.
[81]    Marietta, M., Farley, T., Cote, T. and Murphy, P. 2017. The Rhetorical Psychology of Trumpism:
        Threat, Absolutism, and the Absolutist Threat. The Forum (2017), 313–332.
[82]    Martin, L., Sintsova, V. and Pu, P. 2014. Are Influential Writers More Objective?: An Analysis of
        Emotionality in Review Comments. Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide
        Web (New York, NY, USA, 2014), 799–804.
[83]    McGee, M.C. 1980. The “ideograph”: A link between rhetoric and ideology. Quarterly journal of
        speech. 66, 1 (1980), 1–16.
[84]    McLeod, D.M. and Detenber, B.H. 1999. Framing effects of television news coverage of social
        protest. Journal of communication. 49, 3 (1999), 3–23.
[85]    McMillan, J.R., Clifton, A.K., McGrath, D. and Gale, W.S. 1977. Women’s language: Uncertainty or
        interpersonal sensitivity and emotionality? Sex Roles. 3, 6 (Dec. 1977), 545–559. DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00287838.
[86]    McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L. and Cook, J.M. 2001. Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social
        Networks.       Annual       Review       of     Sociology.     27,   1      (2001),    415–444.      DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.415.
[87]    Media Bias / Fact Check: Breitbart: https://mediabiasfactcheck.com/breitbart/. Accessed: 2018-04-17.
[88]    Media Bias / Fact Check: Democracy Now: https://mediabiasfactcheck.com/democracy-now/.
        Accessed: 2018-04-17.
[89]    Media Bias / Fact Check: New York Times: https://mediabiasfactcheck.com/new-york-times/.
        Accessed: 2018-04-17.
[90]    Meraz, S. and Papacharissi, Z. 2013. Networked gatekeeping and networked framing on# Egypt. The
        international journal of press/politics. 18, 2 (2013), 138–166.
[91]    Messing, S. and Westwood, S.J. 2014. Selective exposure in the age of social media: Endorsements
        trump partisan source affiliation when selecting news online. Communication Research. 41, 8 (2014),
        1042–1063.
[92]    Metzger, M.J., Flanagin, A.J. and Medders, R.B. 2010. Social and heuristic approaches to credibility
        evaluation online. Journal of communication. 60, 3 (2010), 413–439.
[93]    Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G. and Dean, J. 2013. Efficient Estimation of Word Representations
        in Vector Space. arXiv:1301.3781 [cs]. (Jan. 2013).


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:26                                                                                          E. H. M. Rho et al.

[94]    Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S. and Dean, J. 2013. Distributed representations of
        words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in neural information processing systems
        (2013), 3111–3119.
[95]    Miller, B. The Effects of Scandalous Information on Recall of Policy-Related Information. Political
        Psychology. 31, 6, 887–914. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9221.2010.00786.x.
[96]    Mitchell, A., Gottfried, J., Kiley, J. and Matsa, K.E. 2014. Political Polarization & Media Habits.
[97]    Monk-Payton, B. 2017. # LaughingWhileBlack: Gender and the Comedy of Social Media Blackness.
        Feminist Media Histories. 3, 2 (2017), 15–35.
[98]    Mullen, B., Brown, R. and Smith, C. 1992. Ingroup bias as a function of salience, relevance, and
        status: An integration. European Journal of Social Psychology. 22, 2 (1992), 103–122.
[99]    Munson, S.A. and Resnick, P. 2010. Presenting Diverse Political Opinions: How and How Much.
        Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA,
        2010), 1457–1466.
[100]   Mutz, D.C. 2001. Facilitating communication across lines of political difference: The role of mass
        media. American Political Science Review. 95, 1 (2001), 97–114.
[101]   Mutz, D.C. 2006. Hearing the other side: Deliberative versus participatory democracy. Cambridge
        University Press.
[102]   Nelson, T.E. and Oxley, Z.M. 1999. Issue framing effects on belief importance and opinion. The
        journal of politics. 61, 4 (1999), 1040–1067.
[103]   Niederhoffer, K.G. and Pennebaker, J.W. 2002. Linguistic Style Matching in Social Interaction.
        Journal of Language and Social Psychology. 21, 4 (Dec. 2002), 337–360. DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1177/026192702237953.
[104]   Nytimes.com            Traffic,         Demographics         and         Competitors        -       Alexa:
        https://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/nytimes.com. Accessed: 2018-04-19.
[105]   Oh, C., Lee, T., Kim, Y., Park, S. and Suh, B. 2016. Understanding Participatory Hashtag Practices on
        Instagram: A Case Study of Weekend Hashtag Project. Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference
        Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA, 2016), 1280–1287.
[106]   Papacharissi, Z. and de Fatima Oliveira, M. 2012. Affective news and networked publics: The
        rhythms of news storytelling on# Egypt. Journal of Communication. 62, 2 (2012), 266–282.
[107]   Park, A. 2017. #MeToo reaches 85 countries with 1.7M tweets.
[108]   Park, S., Ko, M., Kim, J., Liu, Y. and Song, J. 2011. The Politics of Comments: Predicting Political
        Orientation of News Stories with Commenters’ Sentiment Patterns. Proceedings of the ACM 2011
        Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (New York, NY, USA, 2011), 113–122.
[109]   Pennebaker, J.W., Boyd, R.L., Jordan, K. and Blackburn, K. 2015. The Development and
        Psychometric Properties of LIWC2015. (Sep. 2015).
[110]   Pennebaker, J.W., Mehl, M.R. and Niederhoffer, K.G. 2003. Psychological Aspects of Natural
        Language Use: Our Words, Our Selves. Annual Review of Psychology. 54, 1 (2003), 547–577. DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.54.101601.145041.
[111]   Pennington, J., Socher, R. and Manning, C. 2014. Glove: Global vectors for word representation.
        Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP)
        (2014), 1532–1543.
[112]   Phelan, H. 2018. How Does Submissive Sex Work in the Age of #MeToo? The New York Times.
[113]   Redlawsk, D.P., Civettini, A.J. and Emmerson, K.M. 2010. The affective tipping point: Do motivated
        reasoners ever “get it”? Political Psychology. 31, 4 (2010), 563–593.
[114]   Rho, E.H.R., Haimson, O.L., Andalibi, N., Mazmanian, M. and Hayes, G.R. 2017. Class Confessions:
        Restorative Properties in Online Experiences of Socioeconomic Stigma. Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
        Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA, 2017), 3377–3389.
[115]   Robertson, S.P., Douglas, S., Maruyama, M. and Semaan, B. 2013. Political discourse on social
        networking sites: Sentiment, in-group/out-group orientation and rationality. Information Polity. 18,
        2 (Jan. 2013), 107–126. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/IP-130303.


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


Linguistic Behavior in Comments of #MeToo Articles Across Political Perspectives                                28:27

[116]   Robertson, S.P., Vatrapu, R.K. and Medina, R. 2010. Off the wall political discourse: Facebook use in
        the 2008 U.S. presidential election. Information Polity. 15, 1,2 (Jan. 2010), 11–31. DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.3233/IP-2010-0196.
[117]   Rodino-Colocino, M. 2014. #YesAllWomen: Intersectional Mobilization Against Sexual Assault is
        Radical (Again). Feminist Media Studies. 14, 6 (Nov. 2014), 1113–1115. DOI:
        https://doi.org/10.1080/14680777.2014.975475.
[118]   Romero, D.M., Meeder, B. and Kleinberg, J. 2011. Differences in the Mechanics of Information
        Diffusion Across Topics: Idioms, Political Hashtags, and Complex Contagion on Twitter.
        Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web (New York, NY, USA, 2011),
        695–704.
[119]   Rubin, V., Conroy, N., Chen, Y. and Cornwell, S. 2016. Fake news or truth? using satirical cues to
        detect potentially misleading news. Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Computational
        Approaches to Deception Detection (2016), 7–17.
[120]   Ryall, J. 2018. South Korean actor’s suicide triggers backlash against #MeToo.
[121]   Safronova, V. 2018. Catherine Deneuve and Others Denounce the #MeToo Movement. The New York
        Times.
[122]   Sang-Hun, C. 2018. A Director’s Apology Adds Momentum to South Korea’s #MeToo Movement.
        The New York Times.
[123]   Santiago, C. and Criss, D. 2017. An activist, a little girl and the heartbreaking origin of “Me too.”
        CNN.
[124]   Scheufele, D.A. 1999. Framing as a theory of media effects. Journal of communication. 49, 1 (1999),
        103–122.
[125]   Schuck, A.R. and De Vreese, C.H. 2006. Between risk and opportunity: News framing and its effects
        on public support for EU enlargement. European Journal of Communication. 21, 1 (2006), 5–32.
[126]   Schwartz, H.A., Eichstaedt, J.C., Kern, M.L., Dziurzynski, L., Ramones, S.M., Agrawal, M., Shah, A.,
        Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D., Seligman, M.E.P. and Ungar, L.H. 2013. Personality, Gender, and Age in
        the Language of Social Media: The Open-Vocabulary Approach. PLOS ONE. 8, 9 (Sep. 2013), e73791.
        DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0073791.
[127]   Schwarz, N. and Clore, G.L. 1991. How Do I Feel About It? The Informative Function of Affective States
        in K. Fiedler and JP Forgas, eds, Affect, Cognition, and Social Behavior 44. Hogrefe & Huber.
[128]   Sears, D.O. and Freedman, J.L. 1967. Selective Exposure to Information: A Critical Review. Public
        Opinion Quarterly. 31, 2 (Jan. 1967), 194–213. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1086/267513.
[129]   Semetko, H.A. and Valkenburg, P.M. 2000. Framing European politics: A content analysis of press
        and television news. Journal of communication. 50, 2 (2000), 93–109.
[130]   Shrum, L.J. 2009. Media consumption and perceptions of social reality: Effects and underlying
        processes. Media effects. Routledge. 66–89.
[131]   Silverman, C. 2017. This Is How Your Hyperpartisan Political News Gets Made. BuzzFeed.
[132]   Silverman, C., Strapagiel, L., Shaban, H., Hall, E. and Singer-Vine, J. 2016. Hyperpartisan Facebook
        Pages Are Publishing False And Misleading Information At An Alarming Rate. BuzzFeed.
[133]   Small, T.A. 2011. What the Hashtag? Information, Communication & Society. 14, 6 (Sep. 2011), 872–
        895. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2011.554572.
[134]   Sparck Jones, K. 1972. A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application in retrieval.
        Journal of Documentation. 28, 1 (Jan. 1972), 11–21. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1108/eb026526.
[135]   Stevens, M. 2018. Chelsea Handler: The #MeToo Movement Is a ‘Complete Referendum’ on Trump.
        The New York Times.
[136]   Stewart, L.G., Arif, A., Nied, A.C., Spiro, E.S. and Starbird, K. 2017. Drawing the Lines of Contention:
        Networked Frame Contests Within #BlackLivesMatter Discourse. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact.
        1, CSCW (Dec. 2017), 96:1–96:23. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3134920.
[137]   Stieglitz, S. and Dang-Xuan, L. 2013. Emotions and Information Diffusion in Social Media—
        Sentiment of Microblogs and Sharing Behavior. Journal of Management Information Systems. 29, 4
        (Apr. 2013), 217–248. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222290408.


Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.


28:28                                                                                           E. H. M. Rho et al.

[138]    Strauss, A. and Corbin, J.M. 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for
         Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications.
[139]    Sunstein, C.R. 2018. # Republic: Divided democracy in the age of social media. Princeton University
         Press.
[140]    Tajfel, H. 1981. Human groups and social categories: Studies in social psychology. CUP Archive.
[141]    Tajfel, H. 1974. Social identity and intergroup behaviour. Information (International Social Science
         Council). 13, 2 (1974), 65–93.
[142]    Tarbox, K. 2018. Is #MeToo Backlash Hurting Women’s Opportunities in Finance?
[143]    Tolentino, J. 2018. The Rising Pressure of the #MeToo Backlash. The New Yorker.
[144]    Triandafyllidou, A. 2000. The political discourse on immigration in southern Europe: a critical
         analysis. Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology. 10, 5 (Oct. 2000), 373–389. DOI:
         https://doi.org/10.1002/1099-1298(200009/10)10:5<373::AID-CASP595>3.0.CO;2-R.
[145]    Tsfati, Y. and Cappella, J.N. 2003. Do people watch what they do not trust? Exploring the
         association between news media skepticism and exposure. Communication Research. 30, 5 (2003),
         504–529.
[146]    Utych, S.M. 2017. How Dehumanization Influences Attitudes toward Immigrants. Political Research
         Quarterly. (Dec. 2017), 1065912917744897. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/1065912917744897.
[147]    Utych, S.M. 2018. Negative Affective Language in Politics. American Politics Research. 46, 1 (Jan.
         2018), 77–102. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/1532673X17693830.
[148]    Wang, X., Wei, F., Liu, X., Zhou, M. and Zhang, M. 2011. Topic Sentiment Analysis in Twitter: A
         Graph-based Hashtag Sentiment Classification Approach. Proceedings of the 20th ACM International
         Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (New York, NY, USA, 2011), 1031–1040.
[149]    Wang, Y. and Mark, G. 2017. Engaging with Political and Social Issues on Facebook in College Life.
         Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social
         Computing (New York, NY, USA, 2017), 433–445.
[150]    Wang, Y.-C., Joshi, M. and Rosé, C.P. 2008. Investigating the Effect of Discussion Forum Interface
         Affordances on Patterns of Conversational Interactions. Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Conference on
         Computer Supported Cooperative Work (New York, NY, USA, 2008), 555–558.
[151]    Warmke, B. and Tosi, J. 2017. Why there are costs to moral outrage. The Conversation.
[152]    Wojcieszak, M.E. and Mutz, D.C. 2009. Online groups and political discourse: Do online discussion
         spaces facilitate exposure to political disagreement? Journal of communication. 59, 1 (2009), 40–56.
[153]    Wu, H.C., Luk, R.W.P., Wong, K.F. and Kwok, K.L. 2008. Interpreting TF-IDF term weights as
         making relevance decisions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS). 26, 3 (Jun. 2008), 13.
         DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/1361684.1361686.
[154]    Yang, L., Sun, T., Zhang, M. and Mei, Q. 2012. We Know What @You #Tag: Does the Dual Role
         Affect Hashtag Adoption? Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on World Wide Web (New
         York, NY, USA, 2012), 261–270.
[155]    2017. #MeToo: Sexual harassment stories sweep social media after... Reuters.
[156]    2017. Opinion | How #MeToo Threatens Equality. The New York Times.
[157]    2018. Opinion | #MeToo Has Done What the Law Could Not. The New York Times.
[158]    2018. Opinion | Publicly, We Say #MeToo. Privately, We Have Misgivings. The New York Times.
[159]    2017. Opinion | When #MeToo Goes Too Far. The New York Times.


Received April 2018; revised July 2018; accepted September 2018.


 Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 147, Publication date: November 2018.