Combining Network and Language Indicators
          for Tracking Conflict Intensity

     Anna Rumshisky1(B) , Mikhail Gronas2 , Peter Potash1 , Mikhail Dubov3 ,
         Alexey Romanov1 , Saurabh Kulshreshtha1 , and Alex Gribov1
    Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, USA
                                 arum@cs.uml.edu
              Department of Russian, Dartmouth College, Hanover, USA
                     Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia


        Abstract. This work seeks to analyze the dynamics of social or political
        conflict as it develops over time, using a combination of network-based
        and language-based measures of conflict intensity derived from social
        media data. Specifically, we look at the random-walk based measure of
        graph polarization, text-based sentiment analysis, and the corresponding
        shift in word meaning and use by the opposing sides. We analyze the
        interplay of these views of conflict using the Ukraine-Russian Maidan
        crisis as a case study.


1     Introduction

Over the past decade, social media websites such as Twitter and Facebook
(as well as their counterparts in other countries, such as Weibo in China or
VKontakte in Russia) have become an integral part of social life in many locations around the world. In conjunction with the proliferation of social media use,
a number of political conﬂicts and incidents of social unrest occurred around
the world (for example, events associated with the “Arab spring” in Egypt and
Tunisia in 2010 and 2011, Spanish 15-M movement of 2011–2012, and the Russian
takeover of Crimea in 2014). As a result, substantial amounts of data have been
accumulated regarding peoples behavior (both linguistic and extra-linguistic)
in social media prior to and during such conﬂicts. We are now in a position
to attempt a data-driven approach to conﬂict dynamics, detect internal logic,
and analyze patterns in how conﬂicts originate and develop. In doing so, we
follow in the footsteps of conﬂict sociologists such as Randal Collins who in his
seminal 2012 paper outlined the dynamic processes involved in the initiation,
development, and de-escalation of conﬂict [2].
    In this paper, our goal is to look at the conﬂict dynamically as it develops. We hypothesize that as a complex phenomenon, conﬂict gets reﬂected in
multiple related processes. Because conﬂict in our context is an inherently intrahuman phenomenon, signals of its dynamics are likely present in common forms
of communication, of which social media has become ubiquitous. If that is indeed
the case, multiple conﬂict indicators derived from social media can be combined

c Springer International Publishing AG 2017
G.L. Ciampaglia et al. (Eds.): SocInfo 2017, Part II, LNCS 10540, pp. 391–404, 2017.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-67256-4 31


392    A. Rumshisky et al.

into a composite measure of conﬂict intensity. We view conﬂict as a systemic
and dynamic phenomenon, in which these indicators can be tracked over time
to detect signiﬁcant rapid changes. We argue that a typology of interaction
dynamics for diﬀerent indicators may be used to characterize the development
of conﬂict over time.
    For a composite measure to work, there should be a meaningful relationship
between diﬀerent components of a composite measure. In this paper, we investigate whether there is such a relationship between language-based and networkbased measures of controversy. While previous work such as Garimella et al. [6]
has substantially advanced the study of social media-based controversy, by providing the ﬁrst empirical validation for the eﬀectiveness (or ineﬀectiveness) of
various network-based and language-based controversy measures, there has been
no work so far that seeks to determine whether such controversy measures have
a meaningful temporal relationship. In order to analyze the interplay between
these two complementary views of conﬂict, we use the 2013–2014 Ukraine-Russia
Maidan crisis as a case study. By having data collected over a year-long time
period, we are able to calculate controversy measures at various intervals as the
Maidan crisis evolves. This case study is based on the Russian-speaking social
media during the Ukrainian events of 2014, where civil discontent and division
led to protests in the streets, and eventually to armed violence.
    We examine the network-based controversy measure using the user graph in
which connections are induced by information-sharing/information-consuming
patterns in the network. We build and examine network graphs in which an
edge connects two users if they have liked the same social media post. For the
language-based measures, we analyze the rhetorical patterns both quantitatively
and qualitatively: the overall sentiment expressed by the opposing sides (determined using automated text-based sentiment analysis), and the shift in word
meaning and use (“lexical drift”) that happens, as the language used by opposing communities to describe events related to the conﬂict develops diverging
semantic representations. We analyze the drift in word meaning using a word
embedding model [13] that uses contexts of a word’s occurrences in order to
create dense vector space embeddings for individual words.

2     Related Work
The study of conﬂict and civil unrest is a highly interdisciplinary ﬁeld at the
intersection of philosophy, psychology, economics, sociology and political science,
to name just a few. In the context of our study, especially relevant are big data
oriented political science projects such as GDELT (Global Database of Events,
Language, and Tone) and ICEWS (Integrated Crisis Early Warning System) that
aim to predict and monitor civil conﬂicts on the basis of large-scale analysis
of news sources. Distinct from such approaches, we focus on a social media
representation of conﬂicts and network properties in the conﬂicting communities.
Our approach focuses on the micro-analysis of the underlying social dynamics
that lead to conﬂict, operating at the level of individual political opinions and
allegiance.


Combining Network and Language Indicators for Tracking Conflict Intensity      393

    In the ﬁeld of theoretical political science and social psychology, Nowak et
al. [17] and Deutsch et al. [3] have previously suggested that one of the deﬁning
properties of conﬂict is the shift and eventual alignment of the opposing opinions across the divisions between social groups. While our approach is based on
similar underlying ideas, our model allows us to determine empirically and track
such dynamic changes as they develop. Alternatively, the ﬁeld of network science
conceptualizes conﬂict in terms of polarization between user communities. Over
the past few years, the problem of community detection in social networks has
received a lot of attention. In 2006, Newman [16] deﬁned the modularity metric
Q that detects how separate two communities are from each other. Speciﬁcally,
Q examines the clusters formed by two distinct community groups in a network,
and how this clustering compares to a random network. The higher its value,
the more modular the network is. Blondel et al. [1] proposed a community detection algorithm that tries to maximize Q in a given network. Furthermore, the
algorithm generates a hierarchy of partitions: for each partition it makes, that
partition has its own subpartitions. This view becomes more microscopic until
each node is in its own community.
    Peixoto [18] states that the metric of modularity does not take into account
the possible statistical ﬂuctuations of the null model, and notes that modularity can detect highly modular communities in random graphs [8]. Furthermore,
Blondel et al.’s algorithm has diﬃculty detecting communities when the cluster
sizes are small [5,12]. Another criticism of using the modularity metric for polarized community detection comes from the recent work by Guerra et al. [7], who
note that modularity and related measures recover separate and autonomous
communities, but not opposing user clusters. They propose a measure based on
the notion of popularity-at-boundary in order to capture the polarization reﬂecting the opposition between user clusters.
    There are several advantages and disadvantages to the graph-based measures
proposed for quantifying controversy/polarization [6,7,15]. These measures analyze the interaction between to two communities in a graph, based on diﬀering
theories of how conﬂict/polarization manifests itself. Garimella et al. [6] have
proposed the best experimental setup to quantify the best controversy measure. The authors do so by selecting both controversial and non-controversial
topics, and show how well a given measure does at diﬀerentiating between the
two types of topics. The authors show that a conﬂict measure based on random
walks between the two communities (RWC) performs the best out of ﬁve methods tested [6,7,15]. Furthermore, the authors show that the standard deviation
of sentiment is a strong linguistic marker of controversy, whereas average sentiment and divergence of the conﬂicting communities’ vocabularies are not able
to separate between conﬂicting and non-conﬂicting topics.
    Volkova et al. [21] is another example of linguistic analysis during controversy. The authors used language analysis to study and predict the emotional
response during the Maidan crisis. In contrast to their approach, we do not rely
on noisy location data to create our corpus, but instead use self-labeled user
groups relevant to the crisis.


394      A. Rumshisky et al.

3     Dataset
In this study, we used data from Russian-speaking online media, posted during
the Ukrainian events of 2013–2014. We use the largest Russian social network
“VKontakte” (VK)1 . According to liveinternet.ru, VKontakte has 320 million
registered users and is the most popular social network in both Russia and
Ukraine. During the conﬂict, both pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian side (also
known as “Antimaidan” and “Pro-” or “Evromaidan”) were represented online
by large numbers of Russian-speaking users.
    We have built a scalable open stack system for data collection from
VKontakte using VK API. The system is implemented in Python using a PostgreSQL database and Redis-based message queue. VK API has a less restrictive
policy than Facebook’s API, making it an especially suitable social network for
research. Our system supports such API methods as retrieving group members,
retrieving all posts from a wall, retrieving comments and likes for a given post,
and so on. Moreover, we are able to collect all posts (and its related attributes)
by a user that are public.
    In order to seed the data collection, we selected the most popular user groups
from the two opposing camps, the Evromaidan group (154,589 members) and
the Antimaidan group (580,672 members). We then manually annotated other
groups to which the administrators of these two groups belonged, selecting the
groups with political content. This process produced 47 Evromaidan-related
groups with 2,445,661 unique members and 51 Antimaidan-related groups with
1,942,918 unique members. We retrieved all posts from these group walls, as well
as all the users who have liked one of the posts.
    We then selected the users who were reasonably active during the time period
of interest. We deﬁned active users as those who averaged 2 or more posts per
3 months at least once over the target time frame (Oct 1, 2013–Oct 1, 2014).
This resulted in 745,880 users from the Antimaidan-related groups and 725,053
users from the Evromaidan-related groups. We retrieved all posts from these
user walls, as well as all the users who have liked these posts. In order to restrict
our data to politically-themed postings, we built a list of 45 political keywords,
which included the names of political ﬁgures, locations, and derogatory terms
used by both sides. This list was used to ﬁlter the wall posts of Evromaidan and
Antimaidan users.

4     Methodology
Our work leverages the complementary views of networks and language when
analyzing controversy. The ﬁrst part of this section describes the quantitative
methods that we use for measuring conﬂict. Because these methods are general
and provide a single numeric value, they have the potential to be combined into
a composite index. Next, we discuss our qualitative language-based method of
lexical drift. We ﬁnish by discussing how to generalize our methodology to the
analysis of other events.
    http://vk.com.


Combining Network and Language Indicators for Tracking Conflict Intensity      395

4.1     Network-Based Controversy
Our network-based controversy measure is the RWC measure from Garimella et
al. [6]. For all graphs, nodes represent users. We create an edge between two users
(nodes) if they have liked the same post. We use the python package NetworkX2
to construct and manipulate graphs. Once we construct a graph, we extract the
largest connected component. The RWC measure assumes that a given graph
has two communities already identiﬁed – the graph has two clusters for the
nodes. For the VK data, based on the data collection methodology, we have
predeﬁned communities based on whether the user came from an Antimaidan or
Evromaidan group (see Sect. 3).
     To compute the RWC measure on a graph, the ﬁrst step is to identify the
k nodes with highest degree in each community. These are referred to as the
authoritative nodes. Generally speaking, the goal is to calculate the probabilities
of starting a walk at a random node in a given community, and end at an
authoritative node in same community, as well as ending at an authoritative node
in the opposite community. In practice, these probabilities are calculated through
inference as follows: (1) Randomly select 10% of nodes in each community, (2)
For each node, perform a random walk until an authoritative node is reached in
either community. We repeat steps 1 and 2 a thousand times to best estimate the
target probabilities. For each random walk, we keep track of the counts related
to starting on a given side and ending on a given side. The ﬁnal formula for
RWC is:
                           RW C = PXX PY Y − PXY PY X                           (1)
where
              PAB = P [start in community A| end in community B]               (2)
This measure will produce a real-valued score for a given graph, which in turn
represents actions of users in a network.

4.2     Language-Based Controversy
The quantitative linguistic attribute we measure is the sentiment of language
used in the posts from the VK data. Sentiment analysis produces a discrete label
for a piece of text: positive, negative, or neutral, which we convert to an integer
using the following mapping: positive → 1, neutral → 0, negative → −1. Since
these values are given per piece of text (post), we compute aggregate statistics:
average (mean) sentiment and standard deviation of sentiment. Garimella et al.
[6] posit that the standard deviation of sentiment is a conﬂict indicator, like
RWC. We apply language-based analysis to the data used to construct the user
graphs. Thus, the exact posts we analyze is a subset of the overall data that has
been collected.

Sentiment Analysis in Russian. In order to measure the sentiment for
Russian, we used a Python port of the Sentimental system3 for sentiment analysis.
    https://networkx.github.io/.
    https://github.com/Wobot/Sentimental.


396     A. Rumshisky et al.

Sentimental is a dictionary-based sentiment analysis system with basic capabilities of handling negated words. We used a lexicon which consisted of 7640 words
with sentiment scores from −5 to 5. The overall sentiment score of a sentence
is a sum of the scores of individual words, normalized be the length of the sentence. This system, along with the used lexicon, is publicly available on GitHub4 .
We threshold the output of the system to predict its label as follows: > 0 →
positive, = 0 → neutral, < 0 → negative.


4.3   Quantitative Temporal Analysis

In order to analyze the temporal trends of our case studies, we segment the
available data into time slices, which generally is dictated by what data is at our
disposal. Based on the non-overlapping data segments, we calculate the following
measures at each time slice: RWC, average sentiment, and standard deviation of
sentiment. For the Maidan case study, the time slices are at monthly intervals.
Between group and user wall posts, there is an average of 121,989 posts per time
slice.

4.4   Qualitative Linguistic Analysis: Lexical Drift

Following the distributional hypothesis [4,9,14], the contexts in which words
occur are indicative of their meanings. We trained word2vec embeddings [13]
for each temporal slice of VK data, following the methodology outlined in [11].
A similar methodology has previously been used to analyze language during
conﬂict [20]. Word2vec creates a mapping between words and vectors in Rn ,
where n is ﬁxed. Moreover, Mikolov et al. argue that the topology of the vector
space is also semantically continuous – geometric proximity equates to semantic
similarity. As new data is available at each time slice, allowing the model to continue training, the positioning of word representations in the vector space shifts
as words begin to appear in diﬀerent contexts. To compute distance between
embeddings ei , ej , we use the following formula:

                     CosineDistance(ei , ej ) = 1 − cos(θei ,ej )                   (3)

where cos(θei ,ej ) is the cosine of the angle between the embedding vectors ei , ej 5 ,
which is in the range [−1, 1], equaling −1 when the vectors point opposite
directions and equaling 1 when the vectors point the same direction. Thus, a
higher cosine distance translates to the meanings being farther apart. We use
the Python package Gensim6 to train word vectors.
  https://github.com/text-machine-lab/sentimental.
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosine similarity.
  https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/.


Combining Network and Language Indicators for Tracking Conflict Intensity       397


          Fig. 1. Measures of conflict for Maidan, shown in monthly segments


4.5    Generalizability of Methodology

We argue that our method is generalizable across conﬂicts, given the presence
of social media data (collected from a meaningful time period). We do note that
the users of opposing sides should be in the same network and use the same
language, or at least have familiarity with the opposing side’s language. While
our methodology uses joint liking to create edges between users, if Twitter data
were to be used, one can use retweets, as Garimella et al. [6] suggest, instead.
Secondly, the RWC measure requires the presence of two predeﬁned communities.
Although our data collection process is able to annotate this directly, one could
use existing algorithms such as Metis7 [10]. Lastly, our work requires a sentiment
analysis tool. However, oﬀ-the-shelf sentiment tools for languages other than
English may been diﬃcult to come across. Annotated corpora for languages other
than English are beginning to appear, such as for Arabic [19]. Even if annotated
sentiment data is not available, one may use a dictionary-based approach such
as ours.


5     Results and Discussion
In this section, we presents and discuss the quantitative and qualitative measures of the Maidan Crisis’s temporal dynamics, based both on network and
linguistic analysis. The interplay between the random walk controversy (RWC)
measure and the dominating sentiment during the investigated time period is
shown in Fig. 1. For our case study, the relationship between these two reﬂections of an ongoing conﬂict conﬁrmed our initial hypothesis. Essentially, as the
conﬂict intensiﬁes, both the RWC measure and the standard deviation of overall sentiment expressed by the opposing groups (SenSTD) will increase in unison. And in fact, we found that RWC and SenSTD are positively correlated,
    We tested the Metis algorithm on our own data and found it recorded 80% accuracy
    predicting community membership.


398      A. Rumshisky et al.

with Pearson and Spearman correlation values of 0.674 and 0.745, respectively.
We also observed that RWC and the average of the absolute value of the overall
sentiment correlate negatively (with Pearson and Spearman correlation values
of −0.598 and −0.291, respectively), conﬁrming that negative sentiment accompanies the intensiﬁcation of conﬂict.


5.1    Information-Sharing User Network

In order to visualize the evolving conﬂict during the Maidan crisis in Ukraine, we
created graphs based on VK data from speciﬁc temporal intervals (See Fig. 2).
Users are represented as nodes, and an edge exists between two users in a graph if
they have liked the same post (either on user walls or on group walls). In order to
induce graphs from speciﬁc time periods, we restricted a given graph to likes that
occurred on posts that were created in a certain interval. We used a 12-month
time period that started October 2013 and ended September 2014. In order
to create the graph visualizations, we used the Python library NetworkX. The
graph layout we have chosen is based on the Fruchterman-Reingold layout, which
is a force-directed algorithm8 . The algorithm simultaneously tries to minimize
the distance between highly connected nodes while maximizing the distance
between minimally connected nodes. Blue nodes represent pro-Maidan users,
and red nodes represent anti-Maidan users.
    As we proceed from the beginning of the conﬂict, we can observe the initial cluster formation, as a chaotic mass of users organizes into clearly deﬁned
clusters, based on the sources they like. By December 2013 (the month when
support for the Maidan protest became widespread throughout Western and
Central Ukraine), we see the formation of the Maidan cluster, still unopposed.
Around January 2014, we observe the appearance of the counter-cluster, coinciding with the growing organization and ideological coherence of the anti-Maidan
forces, primarily in the Eastern regions. As the conﬂict intensiﬁes, the clusters
grow more dense and modular, which corresponds to the increasing hostility
between the opposing factions in real life and the ﬂare up of the open military
confrontation. Signiﬁcantly, around January 2014, we also begin to observe the
formation of a “bridge” between the two groups, i.e. a set of users who clearly
like both groups of sources. Interestingly, these boundary, “bridge” users in this
case seem to self-identify as anti-Maidan (they belong to the anti-Maidan user
groups, and are correspondingly shown in red).
    Essentially, in Fig. 2, you can see a clear reﬂection of the conﬂict dynamics
described by Collins [2]. October and November 2013 graphs show a random
arrangement of nodes in the absence of conﬂict, followed by an explosion that
begins in December 2013 and January 2014. A bridge is formed and then disappears, as polarization increases and the conﬂict drives out the neutrals. The
bridge begins to thin out around May 2014 and disappears completely in June
2014. As the bridge no longer exists, there is virtually no way for the representatives of the opposing sides to experience the discourse from the other side.
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Force-directed graph drawing.


Combining Network and Language Indicators for Tracking Conflict Intensity       399


Fig. 2. Visualization of pro- and anti-Maidan VK user networks as conflict develops.
Blue nodes represent Evromaidan users, and red nodes represent Antimaidan users.
(Color figure online)


The network visualization in this ﬁgure thus clearly shows the logic hypothesized by Collins. This corresponds to the plateau observed in Fig. 1 that shows
the random walk controversy measure for the Maidan data.


5.2   Lexical Drift

The change in the vector space embedding for the same word over time allows us
to track word meaning drift as it happens during the conﬂict. Figure 3 shows the
change in contextual distribution of important “drifter” words which changed
meaning the most during the conﬂict. The graph shows the cosine distance
between the initial vector space embedding in Feb 2014 and the embeddings
for the following months.


400     A. Rumshisky et al.


Fig. 3. Important “drifter” words that changed meaning the most during the conflict.
The graph shows the cosine distance (left Y axis gives the scale) between the initial
vector space embedding in Feb 2014 and the embeddings for the following months.
Dotted lines show the relative frequency for each word, i.e., the percentage of posts
wherein the word appears (right Y axis gives the scale). The following words are shown
(left to right, top down):         (skakat’) “jump”,        “Putin”,               “referendum”,            (krim) “Crimea”,     (vata) “cottonballs”,        (ukrop) “dill” or
“Ukrainian nationalist”.


    The word              (skakat) (Fig. 3, top left), for example, became a popular taunt, a derogatory term applied by the anti-maidan movement to all various types of Ukrainian nationalist activities. This use of the verb originated in
the viral YouTube video that captured a crowd of young Ukrainian nationalists braving the winter cold and trying to keep warm by hopping together and
chanting                                    , “who is not jumping is a moscovite”.
The chant became the object of ridicule among the “moscovites” and the word
           (skakat) drifted towards new (political and anti-Ukrainian contexts).


Combining Network and Language Indicators for Tracking Conflict Intensity       401


Fig. 4. Cosine distance between the words Russia and Ukraine in Evromaidan and
Antimaidan data


Cosine distance plot for “skakat” suggests that the shift away from the original
meaning for this word was the most pronounced amongst the words shown.
    The graph for the word            (top right) shows a drastic increase in drift
for Putins name among the Euromaidan users from the very start of the conﬂict.
The corresponding drifting rise on the anti-maidan side is much ﬂatter. This is
explained by the singular importance of the Russian president in the conﬂict.
In the eyes of Evromaidan community, he became the personiﬁcation of the
conﬂict (and of the evil in general). Putin became the personal enemy of the
independence minded Ukrainians and the favorite object for taunts and insults
– thus drifting from political contexts to such new embedding neighbours as
          (dick) in September 2014.
    The word           (vata) comes from the word              (vatnik), which is a
type of heavy cotton jacket popular in rural Russia and often worn by soldiers,
prisoners, and farmers. The word “vata” itself means “cotton balls”. During the
conﬂict, the term “vata” became a pejorative term picked up by the Evromaidan
side as a way to taunt Russian nationalists and Russian-speaking Ukrainians
(essentially the Antimaidan side), with the connotation somewhat similar to
the usage of “redneck” in American English. This change in meaning is clearly
visible in the corresponding lexical drift graph. Note that the term’s use by the
Antimaidan side has also shifted substantially (even if to a smaller relative extent
compared to the Evromaidan side). Moreover, we are able to quantitatively
capture the fact that this term was later re-appropriated to some extent by the
Russian nationalists who started to use it as a pride badge of sorts. However,
the frequency plot for “vata” shows that this takeover was still not comparable
to the pervasive pejorative use by the Evromaidan side.


402     A. Rumshisky et al.

            (ukrop) is a word meaning a garden herb, dill, which happens to start
with the same combination of sound “UKR” as the word Ukrainian. This led to
its appropriation by the Antimaidan side as a derogatory term for Ukrainians.
Later on, the word was re-appropriated by Ukrainian nationalists, and was even
used as a name for a pro-Maidan political party. These processes are illustrated by the graphs of semantic drifts: the word ﬁrst shifts its position in the
embedding space in the Antimaidan discourse (from dill to an anti-Ukrainian
tease), and then undergoes a similar, albeit weaker, transformation among promaidaners. Furthermore, the up-tick in lexical drift in the Evromaidan graph
that starts in September 2014 coincides with the formation of the aforementioned political party.
    The words                    (referendum) and               (krim; Crimea in
English) see an immediate change in meaning (high positive slope) going from
February to March as there were referendum votes in Crimea as well the Donetsk
and Luhansk oblasts (provinces) in March that represented pro-Russian desire
to secede from Ukraine and potentially join the Russian Federation. This change
in meaning levels oﬀ, though, in the remaining months as the conﬂict continues.
    This view of the lexical change also allows us to see relative drift in meaning of initially similar words. For example, consider the comparison in Fig. 4
which shows that the cosine distance between the words Russia and Ukraine in
Euromaidan data increased drastically in April 2014. This rise coincides with
the escalation of the conﬂict and the beginning of its military phase. On April 6,
2014, the Eastern separatists captured an administrative buildings in Donetsk
and Lugansk regions and soon proclaimed independence. The occupation of
Slavyansk by the pro-Russian forces led by Igor Strelkov began on April 12.
Thus, in the Euromaidan discourse Russia became associated with the open
aggression and intrusion into the Ukraines internal aﬀairs. This lead to a drastic
peak in the semantic drift that gradually subsides in the next few months.


6     Conclusion

We suggested methods for an analysis of the temporal dynamics of the political
conﬂict as reﬂected in social media, using the 2014 Russian-Ukrainian conﬂict
as a case study. We analyzed the interplay of the division of network-based
vs. language-based measures of conﬂict, using Random Walk Controversy as a
network measure and standard deviation of sentiment and semantic drift as verbal measures. We investigated the hypothesis that the network-based and the
language-based measures of conﬂict intensity should correlate and provided a
preliminary statistical conﬁrmation for it. We also provided a data-driven illustration for Randal Collins’ inﬂuential theory of conﬂict development. Speciﬁcally,
we showed for that the major stages of conﬂict as described by Collins (explosion, plateau, dissipation) and some of the behavioral patterns he postulated
(including driving out of the neutrals) may be observed and visualized in the
social media data for the 2014 Russian-Ukrainian conﬂict. Finally, we performed
a qualitative analysis of the semantic shift for key terms that typiﬁed the conﬂict.


Combining Network and Language Indicators for Tracking Conflict Intensity          403

References
 1. Blondel, V.D., Guillaume, J.L., Lambiotte, R., Lefebvre, E.: Fast unfolding of
    communities in large networks. J. Stat. Mech: Theory Exp. 2008(10), P10008
    (2008)
 2. Collins, R.: C-escalation and D-escalation: a theory of the time-dynamics of conflict. Am. Sociol. Rev. 77(1), 1–20 (2012)
 3. Deutsch, M., Coleman, P.T., Marcus, E.C.: The Handbook of Conflict Resolution:
    Theory and Practice. Wiley, Hoboken (2011)
 4. Firth, J.R.: A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930–1955. In: Studies in Linguistic
    Analysis, pp. 1–32. Philological Society, Oxford (1957)
 5. Fortunato, S., Barthélemy, M.: Resolution limit in community detection. Proc.
    Natl. Acad. Sci. 104(1), 36–41 (2007)
 6. Garimella, K., De Francisci Morales, G., Gionis, A., Mathioudakis, M.: Quantifying controversy in social media. In: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International
    Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 33–42. ACM (2016)
 7. Guerra, P.H.C., Meira Jr., W., Cardie, C., Kleinberg, R.: A measure of polarization
    on social media networks based on community boundaries. In: ICWSM (2013)
 8. Guimera, R., Sales-Pardo, M., Amaral, L.A.N.: Modularity from fluctuations in
    random graphs and complex networks. Phys. Rev. E 70(2), 025101 (2004)
 9. Harris, Z.: Distributional structure. In: Katz, J. (ed.) Philosophy of Linguistics,
    pp. 26–47. Oxford University Press, New York (1985)
10. Karypis, G., Kumar, V.: Metis-unstructured graph partitioning and sparse matrix
    ordering system, version 2.0 (1995)
11. Kim, Y., Chiu, Y.I., Hanaki, K., Hegde, D., Petrov, S.: Temporal analysis of language through neural language models. In: ACL 2014, p. 61 (2014)
12. Lancichinetti, A., Fortunato, S.: Limits of modularity maximization in community
    detection. Phys. Rev. E 84(6), 066122 (2011)
13. Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In: Proceedings of NIPS
    (2013)
14. Miller, G., Charles, W.: Contextual correlates of semantic similarity. Lang. Cogn.
    Process. 6(1), 1–28 (1991)
15. Morales, A., Borondo, J., Losada, J.C., Benito, R.M.: Measuring political polarization: Twitter shows the two sides of venezuela. Chaos: an Interdisciplinary. J.
    Nonlinear Sci. 25(3), 033114 (2015)
16. Newman, M.E.: Modularity and community structure in networks. Proc. Natl.
    Acad. Sci. 103(23), 8577–8582 (2006)
17. Nowak, A., Vallacher, R.R., Bui-Wrzosinska, L., Coleman, P.T.: Attracted to conflict: a dynamical perspective on malignant social relations. In: Understanding
    social change: Political psychology in Poland, pp. 33–49 (2006)
18. Peixoto, T.P.: Hierarchical block structures and high-resolution model selection in
    large networks. Phys. Rev. X 4(1), 011047 (2014)
19. Rosenthal, S., Farra, N., Nakov, P.: Semeval-2017 task 4: sentiment analysis in
    Twitter. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2017). Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver,
    Canada, pp. 502–518. http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/S17-2088


404     A. Rumshisky et al.

20. Stewart, I., Arendt, D., Bell, E., Volkova, S.: Measuring, predicting and visualizing
    short-term change in word representation and usage in VKontakte social network.
    In: Proceedings of the 11th International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
    Media (ICWSM 2017), pp. 33–42 (2017)
21. Volkova, S., Chetviorkin, I., Arendt, D., Durme, B.V.: Contrasting public opinion
    dynamics and emotional response during crisis. In: SocInfo (2016)