818782ANN              The Annals of The American AcademyToward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies
research-article2018


                                                                                                                                                    This article compares the dynamics of polarization in
                                                                                                                                                    the eleven case studies analyzed in this special issue to
                                                                                                                                                    draw conclusions about antecedents of severe political
                                                                                                                                                    and societal polarization, the characteristics and mechanisms of such polarization, and consequences of
                                                                                                                                                    severe polarization for democracy. We find that the
                                                                                                                                                    emergence of pernicious polarization (when a society is
                                                                                                                                                    split into mutually distrustful “Us vs. Them” camps) is
                                                                                                                                                    not attributable to any specific underlying social or
                                                                                                                                                    political cleavage nor any particular institutional makeToward a                                                       up. Instead, pernicious polarization arises when political entrepreneurs pursue their political objectives by
                                                                                     Theory of                                                      using polarizing strategies, such as mobilizing voters
                                                                                                                                                    with divisive, demonizing discourse and exploiting

                                                                                    Pernicious                                                      existing grievances, and opposing political elites then
                                                                                                                                                    reciprocate with similarly polarizing tactics or fail to
                                                                                                                                                    develop effective nonpolarizing responses. We explain
                                                                                  Polarization and                                                  how the political construction of polarization around
                                                                                                                                                    “formative rifts” (social or political rifts that arise durHow It Harms                                                     ing the fundamental formation/reformation of a nationstate), the relative capacity of opposing political blocs to
                                                                                                                                                    mobilize voters versus relying on mechanisms such as
                                                                                   Democracies:                                                     courts or the military to constrain the executive, and
                                                                                                                                                    the strategic and ideological aims of the polarizing
                                                                                   Comparative                                                      actors contribute to the emergence of its pernicious
                                                                                                                                                    form. We analyze the consequences for democracy and

                                                                                   Evidence and                                                     conclude with reflections on how to combat pernicious
                                                                                                                                                    polarization.

                                                                                      Possible     Keywords: polarization; democracy; democratic erosion; populism; opposition strategies
                                                                                     Remedies
                                                                                                                                                    P   olarized polities around the world are suffering democratic erosion. The articles in
                                                                                                                                                    this volume analyze eleven case studies, showing how pernicious polarization—polarization
                                                                                                                                         By
                                                                                                                                   Jennifer Mccoy   Jennifer McCoy is a distinguished university professor
                                                                                                                                         and        of political science at Georgia State University. She is a
                                                                                                                                    Murat Somer     specialist in comparative politics and democratization
                                                                                                                                                    and Latin American politics; she coordinates the international research group on political polarization and
                                                                                                                                                    democratic consequences. She is the author or editor of
                                                                                                                                                    six books, the most recent being International Mediation
                                                                                                                                                    in Venezuela (with Francisco Diez; United States
                                                                                                                                                    Institute of Peace 2011).
                                                                                                                                                    Correspondence: jmccoy@gsu.edu
                                                                                                                                                    DOI: 10.1177/0002716218818782


                                                                                 234                                                                                   ANNALS, AAPSS, 681, January 2019


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies                     235

that divides societies into “Us vs. Them” camps based on a single dimension of
difference that overshadows all others—can occur in very diverse settings and
produce harmful effects for democracy.
    We recognize that political polarization is associated with both democratic
strengthening and democratic erosion (Somer and McCoy 2018). Polarization can
help to strengthen political parties and institutionalize party systems because it
enables them to mobilize voters around identifiable differences. Offering voters
clear choices and serving as heuristic cues can be helpful to democracy.
Polarization is also potentially transformative in its capacity to address an imbalance in the popular vs. oligarchic versions of democracy (Slater 2013 and
Stavrakakis 2018), or to open up a strong state as discussed by Somer in this volume. Democratic reform to enhance inclusion can be the goal when polarizing
challengers organize to represent previously underrepresented groups. Polarization
can thus serve democratization when used by political actors equipped with an
inclusive agenda to contain polarization before it turns pernicious.
    Even then, however, polarizing politics always carries the risk of taking on a
life of its own, eviscerating cross-cutting ties and nonpartisan channels for compromise, and becoming pernicious. Polarizing challengers often provoke an elite
backlash and counter-mobilization to stymie their transformative attempts, rather
than a recognition of their reformist and inclusionary potential in building a constructively agonistic and pluralist democracy (Stavrakakis 2018). This elite backlash, in turn, can motivate the polarizing challengers to double down and strive
to protect themselves by changing the rules and creating hegemonic power.
Thus, whether polarization serves a constructive or destructive purpose for
democracy depends on the behavior of both incumbents and oppositions, new
political actors and traditionally dominant groups.
    This collaborative project is focused on severe political and societal polarization, and moves beyond the conventional conceptualization of polarization as
ideological distance between political parties and candidates. Instead, we are
interested in situations in which people’s identities and interests line up along a
single divide, one in which people form into political groups that are seen in a
competitive, “either-or” relationship with each other, overshadowing people’s
other, normally cross-cutting, identities. This pernicious state results from polarization’s tendency—if not contained—to make the “normal multiplicity of differences in a society increasingly align along a single dimension (where) cross-cutting
differences become instead reinforcing, and people increasingly perceive and
describe politics and society in terms of “Us” vs. “Them” (McCoy, Rahman and
Somer 2018).

Murat Somer is a professor of political science and international relations at Koç University,
Istanbul. He specializes in comparative politics and democratization, and his research on
polarization, religious and secular politics, ethnic conflict, and authoritarianism has appeared
in books, book volumes, and journals, such as Comparative Political Studies, American
Behavioral Scientist and Democratization.

NOTE: The authors appreciate the research assistance provided by Sara Ali, Tahmina
Rahman, and İlker Kocael.


236                                        THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


   In this relational conceptualization, polarization has the tendency to extend
from the partisan world to the realm of everyday social relations. In extreme
cases, political identity can become all-encompassing as people view those in the
“other” camp with distrust, suspicion, or fear, and cease to interact with them—
even segregating themselves in their neighborhoods, social relationships, and
news-feeds with like-minded people.
   The dividing line between the camps may be simply support of, or opposition
to, a personalistic political leader, such as pro- and anti-Trump in the United
States, chavistas and anti-chavistas (for and against former president Hugo
Chávez) in Venezuela, or pro- and anti-Erdoğan people in Turkey. But that dividing line may also reflect competing value systems (such as religious vs. secular),
different visions of democracy (such as representative vs. participatory), or different definitions of citizenship and what rights should be afforded to immigrants.
Group identity, which may act as a proxy or marker for the other aggregated
divisions, is the key, linking citizens to a particular leader or partisan identity.
   In this article, we compare our case studies in light of four basic questions.
First, we examine how pernicious polarization emerges. Are there common antecedents of polarizing episodes in each country’s history, such as social cleavages,
economic crises, or democratic experiences? Second, we explore the characteristics and dynamics of pernicious polarization in action.
   Third, we ask how pernicious polarization impacts democratic institutions and
norms. Here polarization shifts from the outcome we are trying to explain, and
becomes the explanatory factor itself—the independent variable. In McCoy,
Rahman, and Somer (2018), we envisioned four possible outcomes for democracy, three of them negative and one positive: i) government gridlock and governmental control that careen between the parties representing the two camps; ii)
democratic erosion or backsliding under the new elites who have to come to
power, as they gradually concentrate power and exclude prior dominant groups
or dissenters; iii) democratic erosion or even collapse as old power groups reassert control; and iv) a more positive outcome of democratizing reform in response
to democratic crises of careening or backsliding.
   Finally, we compare our cases to see if any patterns emerge in the structural or
institutional factors or even the specific nature of the polarization that might help
us to predict which of these democratic outcomes could result in a given country.


               Emergence of Pernicious Polarization
How do democracies move from normal competitive politics among adversaries
with plural identities to pernicious polarization? Social scientists do not agree on
the structural, institutional, agentic, and elite vs. mass-based causes of severe
polarization (Bermeo 2003; Abramowitz 2010; Druckman, Peterson, and
Slothuus 2013; Campbell 2018). Armed with our relational and political conceptualization of polarization and response, we first focus on the interaction of
underlying social cleavages and grievances (that is, structural factors), and the


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies           237

strategies and discourse of political elites who politicize them (that is agentic factors). We then turn to institutional antecedents.

Structure vs. agency: Underlying cleavages and grievances and elite discourse
    Enterprising political actors who understand the power of polarizing tactics
often build on existing cleavages in a society to simplify and emphasize differences and help to build politically winning coalitions. But our cases show that
polarization is not explained by the simple existence of underlying social cleavages. That is, underlying social cleavages are often present, but are not always the
basis of polarization. Neither is their existence sufficient to predict when polarization occurs. Take ethnic and religious cleavages as an example. Zimbabwe with
its identifiable ethnic cleavage did not consistently express political interests
around those cleavages, and did not consistently experience political polarization.
Poland, Hungary, and the Philippines, on the other hand, with more homogenous
populations in terms of language, religion, and ethnicity, nevertheless experienced episodes of deep polarization. Therefore, we need to understand when
and how social-political cleavages turn into pernicious polarization.
    To examine the role of social and political cleavages in polarization, we distinguish between the salient discursive dimension of polarizations, and the underlying social and political cleavages. As we discussed in the introductory article to
this volume, we refer to long-standing and deep-cutting divisions that either
emerged or could not be resolved during the formation of nation-states, or, sometimes during fundamental re-formations of states such as during transitions from
communism to capitalism, or authoritarian to democratic regimes, as “formative
rifts.” Whenever polarization arises on the basis of a formative rift, we hypothesize that it is more likely to produce pernicious consequences for democracy.
    Table 1 shows these dividing lines for each of our case studies. Some of the
categories are actually empty signifiers, meaning that the speaker and the listener
can assign whatever content they wish to the term. The populist rhetoric distinguishing the virtuous “people” from the conspiring “elite” is an excellent example
of empty signifier (Hawkins et al 2018; Mudde and Kaltwasser 2018). For a populist, the “people” may refer to the “real Americans” or heartland supporters of
Donald Trump, or the native-born Hungarians for supporters of Victor Orbán.
The “elites” might be the establishment political parties, the more educated, the
“deep-state” intelligence agencies and bureaucracy, Wall Street bankers, or foreign governments aligning with local opponents.
    In addition to the traditional social cleavages of class, religion, ethnicity, and
geography, political cleavages can emerge based on issues or values. In polarized
contexts, such cleavages are sometimes simplified to a “Left-Right” discourse,
whose actual content varies from the traditional economic ideological scale
(referring to the degree of intervention or regulation of the state in the economy)
to the more cultural dimensions described in this volume by Vegetti for Hungary
(cosmopolitan/nationalist; traditional/modern) or Rahman for Bangladesh (religious, linguistic, and ethnic definition of the nation). In some of our cases, a
political ideology cleavage around the concept of democracy emerged:


238                                             THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


                                       Table 1
             Discursive Dimensions of Polarization and Underlying Cleavages


                                                     Salient Discursive   Underlying
                                                       Dimension of      Cleavage or
Categories                    Description             Polarization in: Formative Rift in:

Populist              Elite/people                   Venezuela         NA
                      (always discursive; empty      Thailand
                        signifiers)                  Greece
                                                     Hungary
                                                     Turkey
                                                     Poland
                                                     Philippines
                                                     U.S.
Religious/Secular, or Religious vs. secular          Turkey            U.S.
 Church/State          ­values, beliefs, behavior    Bangladesh        Turkey
                        and belonging; Role of                         Poland
                        religion in public life and                    Bangladesh
                        national identity
Cosmopolitan/         Pro- or anti-EU, pro- or      Hungary            NA
 Nationalist            anti-globalist              U.S.
                                                    Greece
Cultural values       Traditional/Modern;           United States      Greece
                       Conservative/Liberal;        Turkey             Turkey
                       Communitarian/               Poland             U.S.
                       Universalist                                    Hungary
                                                                       Poland
Values and Interests Urban/Rural or Center/          Turkey            U.S.
 of Place and Status Periphery and the                                 Thailand
                      ­associated values,                              Turkey
                       ­institutions and markers;
                        Regionalism; Territorial
                        distribution of power and
                        economic resources
Economic ideology Market/Socialist;                  United States     Venezuela
 or Class               Liberalism/Solidarism;       Poland            Greece
                        Austerity/Anti-austerity;    Thailand          Thailand
                        Government role in                             Poland
                        economy
Political Ideology:  (Participatory/represen­        Venezuela         Venezuela
 concept of             tative; Majoritarian         Thailand          Thailand
 ­democracy and         democracy vs liberal         Philippines       South Africa (post
  source of             freedoms; National           Turkey             apartheid)
  ­legitimacy           ­liberation/revolutionary    Zimbabwe 1        Zimbabwe
                         vs liberal)                 Zimbabwe 2
Citizenship rights   Foreign- or native-born;        U.S.              U.S.
   and national          Racial and ethnic minori-   Hungary           South Africa
   ­identity as          ties; Ethnicity/language                      Zimbabwe
    ­formative rifts                                                   Turkey
                                                                       Bangladesh


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies           239

participatory (radical) vs. representative (liberal) democracy in Venezuela, or
royal-elitist “Thai democracy” vs. majoritarian democracy in Thailand.
    Polarization around formative rifts—those we predict to be most enduring and
with pernicious outcomes—occurs in several of our cases. In three of the countries in this volume, the competing foundational myths about the nation and the
state’s purpose, as described by LeBas and Munemo, centered on the legacy of the
liberation wars and the actors claiming its legacy: ZANU and ZAPU in Zimbabwe,
the ANC in South Africa, and Awami League in Bangladesh. In all three cases, the
leaders of the anticolonialist liberation wars claimed a monopoly on the mantle of
“liberation” and thus to serve as the true representatives of the people as nation,
leading to democratic crises when challengers threatened that monopoly.
Unresolved disputes over the basis of national identity further inflamed polarization in Bangladesh in the debate over whether religious identity or language/ethnicity should serve as the primary basis of national identity. Another kind of
formative rift—“protean formative rift”—is evident in Turkey, described by
Somer’s study in this volume. Here, the so-called center-periphery (Shils 1961;
Mardin 1973) rift since the late Ottoman times on one hand produced “republican-centrist” narratives reflecting the values, identities, and institutional premises
of the “center” (Somer 2014). These, for example, described who the heroes and
villains were during the foundational periods of modernization and nation-state
formation, and what should be the indispensable principles of the republic. On
the other hand “conservative-revisionist” narratives emerged, which challenged
many claims, if not the core, of the republican-centrist narrative. These two narratives more or less corresponded to the prosecular and proreligious political
identities, respectively, which were not entirely mutually exclusive. Since the
transition to multiparty politics in 1950, these competing narratives had not produced pernicious polarization until the parties adopted polarizing tactics around
them in the 2000s and overcame the rough balance of power between the electoral majorities of center-right parties and the institutional dominance of a secularrepublican ideology, particularly in the military and judiciary.
    Finally, in the United States, the basic question of citizenship and who enjoys
the rights espoused by the founding fathers—Thomas Jefferson’s “these truths”
of political equality, natural rights, and sovereignty of the people (Lepore
2018)—has been debated since the founding of the republic and its differentiated citizenship for African slaves, Native Americans, and women. Subsequent
divisions focused on birthright citizenship and naturalized citizenship. As Jill
Lepore (2018) argues, at the heart of these conflicts is the dispute over the origin
of truth, whether from God or the laws of nature. The deep polarization over
these competing narratives of citizenship rights and roles of faith and reason led
to a civil war, severe legal and informal discrimination for a century following the
Civil War until the 1964 Civil Rights Act, and repolarization in the late-twentiethcentury, which turned particularly rancorous during the Obama and Trump
administrations.
    Abramowitz and McCoy in this volume examine how racial resentment in the
United States—responding to perceived unfair benefits or redress for historical
legacies of discrimination—helps to explain voter realignment after the 1964


240                                        THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


Civil Rights Act and to predict the vote for Trump in the 2016 U.S. elections.
They further describe how Donald Trump’s candidacy “reinforced some of the
deepest social and cultural divisions within the American electorate—those
based on race and religion.” This feature of the current U.S. polarization that
feeds off a formative rift creates a potential for pernicious polarization, which
should worry democratic social and political actors from both sides of the aisles.
   As is clear from the table, the discourse of polarization does not always match
underlying social or political cleavages or formative rifts. Instead, polarizing
actors more often seek to exploit grievances centered on political, economic, or
cultural complaints; to activate latent resentments based on underlying cleavages
and formative rifts; or bundle formative rifts together with other cross-cutting
divisions. Mass grievances at the societal level are usually detectable and often
exploited and exacerbated by elite political rhetoric. Polarizing speech articulates
or even suggests a grievance, stoking fears, anxieties, and resentments that then
become expressed as hostility, bias, and eventually enmity. By choosing the cleavage or grievance to highlight, political elites drive the polarization in important
ways (Enyedi 2005; Lebas 2006).
   We identify three primary types of grievances:

    Political grievance or crisis of representation. Important segments of the
population may perceive a lack of representation for a variety of reasons. They
may have been actively excluded, such as blacks in apartheid South Africa or the
American South prior to the civil rights era. Voters may also feel unrepresented
if they perceive a lack of difference among colluding political parties viewed as
either corrupt (i.e., too little polarization) or as unresponsive technocrats divorced
from the people. For example, scholars have identified unresponsive technocratic or expert governments as the explanation for rise of populists in the United
States and Europe (Luce 2018; Berman 2017).
   Among our cases, a crisis of representation was ably exploited by Chávez’s
outsider candidacy in Venezuela, as voters rejected the traditional political parties
that they blamed for economic crisis, mismanagement, and corruption in the
1990s; i.e., too little polarization. Similar mobilization of marginalized or alienated sectors occurred with Thaksin in Thailand in his support from the relatively
poor rural and northern parts of the country; the AKP in Turkey, as they mobilized Islamists together with other social, cultural, and geographical groups that
felt hindered or disempowered by bureaucratic and economic elites; the civil
society movement organized around constitutional reform and more pluralist
representation in government and becoming the MDC opposition party in
Zimbabwe; Estrada’s appeal to the marginalized poor in the Philippines; and of
course the challenge to apartheid South Africa.

  Economic grievance. Short-term economic crisis makes an easy target for
political challengers. The populist Syriza party rose to dominance after three decades of alternation between two traditional political parties in Greece led to their
implosion in the wake of the 2009 economic crisis, as did Chávez’s ­movement in


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies           241

Venezuela after the hyperinflation of the 1990s. Similarly, economic crisis and
missteps by his opponent helped to propel Orbán’s Fidesz into office in Hungary
in 2010 and motivated businessman Thaksin to run for office in Thailand following
the 1997 Asian financial crisis. Turkey’s 2001 financial crisis helped the AKP initially to come to power with the electorate disillusioned with the existing parties.
    Longer-term income inequality and relative deprivation can also serve as a
mobilizing tool by targeting the economic anxiety of the “left-behinds.” The PiS
party in Poland mobilized Catholics with their ideology of “solidarism” vs. liberalism, highlighting the relative deprivation felt by Poles who perceived a decline in
their economic well-being and social esteem relative to the liberal elites benefitting from the post-Communist transformation. In Turkey, developmental policies
based on import-substitution until the 1980s favored urban industrial interests at
the expense of rural interests, forming a grievance held by the countryside that
was represented successfully first by center-right parties and then by the AKP
who bundled it together with other cleavages. Donald Trump argued that immigrants and foreign trade were “stealing jobs” from U.S. workers feeling left
behind after decades of growing income inequality, using a polarizing globalist vs.
nationalist message that pitted America against the world.

   Cultural grievance. Cultural grievances around the rights of specific religions,
or Church vs. State arguments, kulturkampfs between secularized and conservative lifestyles among members of the same religion, as well as moral debates
around gender and sexual rights or issues of sex and death can become the most
polarizing because moral issues are the most difficult on which to compromise
(Skitka and Morgan 2014). The “cultural backlash” theory has also been argued
to better predict populist votes in the United States and Great Britain than the
economic anxiety theory (Inglehart and Norris 2016), while racial resentment
was at least as important as economic anxiety in the Trump vote (Abramowitz and
McCoy, this volume).
   Cultural grievances also emerge from a perceived loss or threat of loss of social
or economic status by a dominant group in society, as explained by dominant
status group theory (King and Wheelock 2007; Outten et al 2012; Sidanius and
Pratto 2001). In these cases, changing demographics and political realignments
can produce anxiety among such groups and, commonly, a receptivity to polarizing populist messages. The reaction of white, male, Christian, Trump supporters to the presidency of a biracial man in the United States, and to the growing
diversity of the United States (in terms of race, religion, sexual orientation, and
gender relations in the workplace) exemplifies a perceived loss of social and economic status (Mutz 2018). Similarly, Fidesz party leader, Viktor Orbán, successfully articulated a desire to keep Hungary for ethnic Hungarians, capitalizing on
the threat posed by the refugee crisis of Syrians and northern Africans entering
Europe as a campaign theme. In Thailand, the backlash against Thaksin’s coalition of rural and Northern voters from the urban middle class and Southern voters was based, at least in part, on a perceived loss of social status as the urbanites
lost electoral dominance to the rural majorities. Similarly, kulturkampf(s)


242                                       THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


between the less and more educated, between the more religious-conservative
and rural and the more secular and urban, and even between proreligious and
prosecular women activists underlie the polarization between the supporters and
opponents of the AKP and Erdoğan.

Institutional antecedents and democratic historical experience
    As our cases show, pernicious polarization can emerge in newer as well as
established democracies. All of our cases had either a medium-term (20–40 years)
experience with democracy, or a long-term history (more than 40 years). Thus, we
argue that the length and quality of democratic history are more likely to impact
the consequences of polarization for democracy, than to explain its emergence.
    Likewise, we maintain that severe polarization can occur in democracies with
various institutional setups, but the design and strength of institutions may
impact the severity of polarization and its consequences for democracy. Hence,
our cases include parliamentary as well as presidential democracies and those
with proportional as well as majoritarian electoral systems. Our cases imply that
institutional strength should be understood to entail, in addition to features such
as credibility and adaptability (North 1990; Mahoney and Thelen 2010), the
agentic dimension of how judiciously and consistently people manage the state
institutions and implement formal and informal institutional rules at critical junctures. We return to these points in subsequent sections.
    Institutional design can be expected to provide incentives and opportunities
for polarizing political leaders and parties to pursue different strategies and seek
to build different coalitions. Since proportional representation (PR) systems provide more opportunities for multiple, smaller parties to enter legislatures even
when they represent similar cleavages and compete for overlapping constituencies, polarizing entrepreneurs may at least initially focus on the inward-looking
strategy of consolidating their own bloc. In turn, since majoritarian electoral
systems discourage smaller parties and the internal fragmentation of major electoral blocs, polarizing actors may concentrate on the outward-looking strategy of
attacking and chipping away at the electoral support of the rival blocs.
    As we discuss further in the section ahead on the dynamics and consequences
of polarization, in general, single-member districts or mixed electoral systems
(with some single-member and some proportional representation districts) are
more likely to give disproportionate representation to the largest vote-getting
party than are purely PR systems. We expect majoritarian electoral systems to
deepen the democracy-eroding effects of polarization, and majoritarian and proportional systems to generate different incentives and opportunities for polarizing political agents.
    In some of our cases, the polarizing period began with one party winning an
absolute legislative majority, giving it the opportunity to then remake the rules to
further its own advantage. This was the case in Bangladesh, Hungary, Poland, the
Philippines, South Africa, Turkey, and the United States. Of these, the AL in
Bangladesh, Fidesz in Hungary, the ANC in South Africa, and the AKP in Turkey
all went on to reform the constitution, further enhancing the electoral advantage


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies         243

for the majority party and augmenting executive power. Erdoğan’s constitutional
reform even changed the parliamentary system to an (executive) presidential
one; he then went on to win the 2018 elections with significant new powers.
   In other cases, the governing party at the beginning of the polarization period
ruled in coalition, but subsequently gained absolute majorities and attempted
constitutional reforms and major legislative changes. Thaksin first won power in
Thailand in 2001 benefitting from a 1997 constitutional reform that aimed to
strengthen political parties and the prime minister. His attempt to further change
the constitution failed in 2001, but his party won subsequent elections with absolute majorities, only to be repeatedly deposed by a royalist-elitist-military coalition until the military took power indefinitely in 2014. Hugo Chávez won the
presidency in Venezuela in 1998 without a legislative majority, but engineered a
constitutional reform the following year, strengthening presidential powers and
changing electoral rules, and another in 2009 abolishing term limits; his party
won electoral majorities in every election until 2015.
   Polarizing leaders also attempted, but failed, to change the constitution early
in their mandates in Poland (PiS party in 2015) and the Philippines (Estrada in
1999). The PiS went on to implement the changes anyway with their legislative
majority after changing the composition of the Constitutional Tribunal to a more
compliant one. Zimbabwe’s polarizing periods each started out with ZANU-PF in
power, but ended with power-sharing agreements as the challengers gained electoral strength and ZANU-PF was reluctant to give up power. The second polarization period (2000–2008) in fact started as a consequence of constitutional
reform efforts, when the civil society movement defeating the government’s
reform proposals formed a new political party in 2000 and won a legislative
majority. They lost some ground in subsequent elections in the wake of severe
repression but split the legislature in 2008 elections and formed a power-sharing
government to end the electoral stand-off, a result that defused the polarization
but left the ZANU-PF as the dominant power.
   Only the United States and Greece did not see a constitutional reform effort.
In the United States, scholars debate the role of institutional design in producing
polarization (Sides and Hopkins 2015). Nevertheless, the partisan-led model of
redistricting in most states creates a system of gerrymandering that gives the
advantage to the party in power—in this case, to the Republican Party as they
won power in a majority of states in the 2000s. And the democratization of party
primary systems (adopted by both parties in the 1970s) contributed to the incentives for more extreme candidates to be selected by the activist partisans who
tend to vote in primaries. Thus, polarization contributed to even greater polarization. New, stricter voter identification laws championed by the Republican Party,
changes to campaign finance rules, and allegations of voter suppression also
appeared to indicate efforts to enhance partisan electoral advantages. Given the
difficulty of changing the constitution, the increasingly partisan battles over
Supreme Court nominations revolve, in large part, around constitutional interpretation. In addition, important institutional rule changes result from and continue to shape the polarizing dynamic, such as removing the filibuster from
judicial nominations.


244                                        THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


      Polarizing Dynamics: Common Patterns and Variations
One of the most notable characteristics of pernicious polarization is the
Manichean, moralizing character of political discourse. Leaders and supporters
alike describe their own and opposing political groups in black and white terms
as good and evil. They ascribe nefarious, often immoral, intentions and demonstrate prejudice and bias against those in the opposing camp. In this sense, polarization politically activates the latent tendencies in the population toward
ethnocentrism—generally favorable views toward the in-group, and unfavorable
stereotyping of the out-group (Kinder and Kam 2009).
   As we noted in the introductory article, many of our cases involve populist
leaders, who often bundle populism with other polarizing themes and messages.
Further, populist leaders generally employ polarizing language and often generate antipopulist counter-mobilizations. Therefore, we are examining populism as
one of the discursive dimensions of polarization. Scholars of populism identify
Manichean discourse as one of three elements of populism, the other two being
pro-people and anti-elite (Hawkins et al. 2018; Mudde and Kaltwasser 2017). In
the majority of our cases, polarizing politicians regularly divide the populace into
the “good” people and the “evil” elites. Populist leaders rail against the establishment or the elites, blaming them for the plight of the people, while upholding the
virtues of the undefined “people” whom they claim to represent.
   When opponents reciprocate with derogatory antipopulist language, the polarizing dynamic spirals. For example, in Venezuela, supporters of Hugo Chávez
were called chusmas (gangs) by their opponents, while Chávez’s supporters
referred to the middle- and upper-class opposition as sifrinos (a slang term from
a song about a rich, brainless woman caring only about luxury consumption)
(McCoy and Diez 2011). Kongkirati in this volume describes the Manichean
language on both sides in Thailand: “It is an uncompromising warfare between
the ‘good’ and the ‘bad’; ‘moral, clean, enlightened’ and ‘immoral, corrupt, stupid’ people; ‘patriots’ and ‘traitors’; and ‘aristocrat’ and ‘commoners.’” In the
United States, Donald Trump gives derogatory nicknames to political opponents
and critics, while categorizing entire sectors with pejoratives, such as “fake
media.” Trump opponents often imply his supporters are racist or ignorant.
   But we see the same Manichean discourse denigrating opponents while lauding supporters even in cases that are not as saliently populist in their politics,
implying that it reflects a general feature of polarizing politics, whereby the
“elites vs. people” frame salient in populism constitutes a subtype of it. For example, Rahman describes the language used by both parties in Bangladesh in the
polarizing episode of the International Crimes Tribunal: “Chaagu, a very derogatory Bengali term meaning a person with the intellectual level of a sheep, became
popular with the pro-Shahbag elements to describe the anti-Tribunal elements.”
Meanwhile the opposition BNP leader “publicly identified the pro-Tribunal
Shahbag movement as the congregation of ‘immoral atheists.’” In Zimbabwe,
LeBas and Munemo report that in the earlier conflict between ZANU and
ZAPU, ZANU showed a “clear pattern of targeting Ndebele civilians on the


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies          245

presumption that all Ndebele were ZAPU supporters and were also dissidents:
‘the child of a snake is also a snake.’” In the second polarizing period between
ZANU-PF and the MDC, the symbolic delegitimation of the coopted opposition
leader continued even after the power-sharing agreement appointing the MDC
leader prime minister was signed: “Zimbabwe’s military chiefs refused to salute
Tsvangirai at his inauguration, citing his lack of liberation war credentials, and
high-ranking military officials referred to him as a security threat or as ‘taking
orders from foreigners’ throughout the power-sharing period.”
   Social psychologists have found that social identity leads group members to
hold positive sentiments toward in-group members and negative sentiments
toward out-group members. The more salient the identity, the stronger the loyalty toward in-group members and the prejudice and antipathy toward out-group
members tend to be (Tajfel and Turner 1979; Gaertner et al 1993). The dynamics
of intergroup conflict in particular lead members of a group to exhibit sympathy
and loyalty to members of their group, while they exhibit antipathy and prejudice
toward members of the out-group.
   We argued in McCoy, Rahman, and Somer (2018) that “severely polarized
democracies exhibit the tribal nature of intergroup dynamics, in which members
become fiercely loyal to their ‘team,’ wanting it to win at all costs, and strongly
biased or prejudiced against the other group. The psychology of polarization
becomes fundamental as mechanisms of dehumanization, depersonalization, and
stereotyping all contribute to the emotional loathing, fear, and distrust of the outpartisans” (p. 23). Politicians use symbols and language to create an “us” and
“them” identity and thus contribute to these psychological mechanisms, whether
intentionally or unintentionally.
   In polarized politics, negative campaigning reinforces the antipathy toward the
out-party’s candidates and supporters. As a consequence, we often see a rise in
negative partisanship, as Abramowitz and McCoy show in their case study of the
United States in this volume—when vote choices are informed by a voter’s dislike
of an opposing candidate more than their liking of their own candidate. The use
of insults to characterize opponents contributes to the psychological categorization of individuals, and the very usage of pronouns, where entire categories of
persons are referred to not by name, but as the impersonal “them,” depersonalizes and makes it easy to dehumanize them. Language of blame is commonly
used, where blame is placed on “them,” the out-group, who are victimizing “us,”
the in-group.
   In polarizing settings, people who hold moderate opinions and maintain interests and identities that cut across the dividing line are increasingly ostracized,
diminishing any chance of dialogue between opposing groups. As the Venezuelan
case shows, it becomes nearly impossible to claim a neutral or middle position in
a polarized polity as the most vocal proponents of each camp (usually the most
radical positions) attempt to label or categorize not only individuals, but also
media, and educational and civic organizations as belonging to one side or the
other. Those who attempt to have a dialogue or compromise with the other side
are then labeled as traitors or sell-outs (McCoy and Diez 2011; Garcia-Gaudilla
and Mallen, this volume). Likewise, Somer in this volume argues how trimodal


246                                       THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


polarization in Turkey turned incrementally bi-modal as potential “bridge-­
makers” in the middle were wiped out and it became increasingly difficult for
people to remain nonpartisan and maintain a critical position toward both blocs
at the same time.
    In fact, in pernicious polarization, intra-bloc tensions often escalate as high as
do the inter-bloc tensions, whereby the hardliners and softliners within each bloc
may fiercely blame each other. In the Turkish case, an example of this is the ongoing dispute between those opposition actors who had opposed a critical set of
constitutional reforms, which the AKP government passed in a crucial 2010 referendum, by arguing these changes would crack the door open for AKP hegemony and authoritarianism; and those who had defended the reforms by arguing
that they were not enough, but they were worth supporting, using the campaign
slogan “insufficient but yes,” as Somer discusses in his contribution. In Venezuela,
it includes the divide within the opposition to President Maduro about whether
to spur a presidential resignation or ouster through street protests, or focus
resources on the tedious work of grass-roots organization-building to compete
electorally. More recently, intra-opposition divides included the debate over
whether to participate at all in unfair elections. Such divides can fragment an
opposition and help to consolidate the rule of the dominant party.
    Structural changes also tend to happen in the economy, bureaucracy, and key
sectors, such as the media, that enable or reinforce the weakening of the middle
ground in public and political discourse. Accordingly, ownership and/or management of institutions shift to opportunistic or ideological loyalists of one bloc or
the other. This results in a situation where, for example, independent journalists
find it increasingly more difficult to shape the news, or, worse, maintain their
jobs.
    Thus, a summary of the most striking features of pernicious polarization in our
cases that distinguish it from a healthy pluralism in democratic society:

  a)	Division of the electorate into two hostile camps, where multiple cleavages
      have collapsed into one dominant cleavage or boundary line between the
      two camps.
  b)	The political identity of the two camps becomes a social identity in which
      members feel they belong to a “team” and demonstrate strong loyalty to
      it.
  c)	Political demands and interests become formed around those identities.
  d)	The two camps are characterized in moral terms of “good” and “evil.”
  e)	The identities and interests of the two camps are viewed as mutually exclusive and antagonistic, thus negating the possibility of common interests
      between different groups.
  f)	A greater cohesion grows within groups, and greater conflict and hostility
      between groups.
  g)	Stereotyping and prejudice builds toward the out-group due to lack of
      direct communication and/or social interaction.
  h)	The center drops out and the polarized camps attempt to label all individuals and groups in society as one or the other.


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies              247

   i)	Institutions, including media, become dominated by one bloc or the other
       through discursive changes as well as changes of ownership, management,
       and staff, weakening the middle ground in public and political discourses.
   j)	The antagonistic relationship manifests in spatial and psychological separation of the polarized groups.

Life of its own
    Once the forces of polarization are set in motion, they often take on a life of their
own. Social and political incentives make it increasingly more convenient for individuals to go along with polarization, and, if and when a critical mass is reached,
powerful cascade (bandwagon) effects can be activated (Kuran 1995; Somer 2001).
Though the polarizing dynamics may be initiated and sustained by political entrepreneurs for their own political benefits, it can become self-­propagating and entrap
those very political actors. Somer describes in this volume the process in Turkey:
when Erdoğan’s AKP used polarizing tactics to mobilize voters and win, it “triggered changes that transformed the AKP itself and the mainstream political field
at large. … [T]his logic of polarization locked both the party and its rivals in a web
of intended, unintended, and mutually reinforcing policies and discourses, which
were antidemocratic or had democracy-destroying consequences.”
    As polarization extends into other areas of social interaction and sharpens Us
vs. Them identity politics, interactions along all other planes diminish considerably, channels of communication between groups break down, and intragroup
solidarity increases at the expense of intergroup cohesion. Palonen (2009)
describes the “totalizing” nature of polarization as it extends from the political to
societal realms—a process perhaps most advanced in our set of cases of Venezuela
and Hungary, but increasingly in the United States and Turkey as well.
    The dominant political frontier creates a point of identification and confrontation in the political system, where consensus is found only within the political
camps themselves. Polarization is reproduced in all political and social contests
with an intensity that distinguishes it from mere two-party politics. It is a totalizing system, as it aims to dominate the existing system of differences and identities. (Palonen 2009, 321)


                                     Variations
We have already discussed variations in the types of underlying cleavages and
grievances. There are also variations in the political motivations or strategic aims
underlying the use of polarizing strategies, and the actual strategies used by
polarizing incumbents and oppositions, to which we now turn.

Strategic and ideological aims of polarizing elites
  The strategic and ideological aims underlying elites’ use of polarization as a
political strategy also vary. We identify three basic patterns giving rise to the


248                                         THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


political use of polarization: the more stationary and pro-status-quo pattern of
intra-elite power struggles and party competition, and the inclusionary and exclusionary versions of transformative politics in which mass-based popular demands
for fundamental change are channeled and exploited by a political entrepreneur
able to capitalize on this demand.
   In the first pattern, intra-elite conflicts drive rival elites to compete for political power by mobilizing voters to boost their electoral chances. They may do so
on the basis of appeals to populism or other claims to represent a sector of the
population or the people. These are not so much democratizing efforts to include
new sectors into the polity and economy, as they are elite instrumentalism to
further their own interests. These efforts may turn into a polarized struggle
between elites able to capitalize on the vertical accountability of popular sovereignty and elections in competition with other elites who dominate the horizontal
accountability of institutional checks and balances to constrain the executive
(Slater and Arugay 2018).
   Intra-elite competitions characterized polarization in Bangladesh and
Zimbabwe following national liberation wars from colonialism, in which rival
elites claimed the mantle of representing revolutionary legitimacy (Rahman;
LeBas and Munemo, this volume) and “manufactured” differences to be able to
compete electorally, and in Thailand and the Philippines as disaffected elites created their own political movements to further their own agendas (Kongkirati;
Arugay and Slater, this volume).
   In the second and third patterns, polarization becomes a transformative political strategy, in which the dominant political motive and discursive focus seem to
be either progressive-inclusionary, seeking to include previously marginalized
sectors, or reactionary-exclusionary, seeking to exclude threatening outsiders. In
these patterns, polarizing politicians challenge the status quo, often with populist
undertones. While demand from the electorate is not absent in the first pattern
of intra-elite power struggles, in the cases of transformative polarization, the
masses play a more proactive role in demanding and mobilizing for change,
which is then channeled by a political entrepreneur, often a political outsider who
seizes the political opportunity.
   In the progressive-inclusionary version, polarizing confrontation is required to
achieve democratizing reforms, argue the challengers. Turkey under Erdoğan,
which Somer in this volume analyzes as a case of “polarizing-cum-transformative
politics,” and Venezuela under Chávez, arguably the cases with the most revolutionary political aims, are the exemplars of pernicious polarization becoming
self-propagating and producing authoritarian outcomes under the new elites. In
both cases, polarizing actors successfully mobilized and then acted upon the new
status- and redistribution-seeking, upwardly mobile and progressive impulses of
previously marginalized groups.
   In the reactionary-exclusionary version of transformative polarization, the restoration of declining dominant group status requires excluding interlopers, assert
the challengers. Hence, polarizing actors act upon the reactionary and exclusive
impulses of masses who feel they have suffered loss of status and resources.
Hungary’s Viktor Orbán, Poland’s Jaroslaw Kaczyński, and Donald Trump in the


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies         249

United States all use system-delegitimizing rhetoric and populist appeals to capitalize on existing fears and anxieties and create new ones, particularly focusing on
anti-immigrant and racial appeals. Their parties practice asymmetric polarization
at the elite level, as Tworzecki describes, with the victorious challengers breaking
with the prevailing liberal-democratic consensus and moving their parties toward
ever more extremes.

Incumbent strategies
   Once in power, polarizing elites choose a strategy to govern and to conduct
relations with the opposition, conditioned on their own capacity. Most polarizing
incumbents work to entrench their electoral advantages. In fact, a prevalent
trend during polarization in our cases, described above, is the temptation to
amass sufficient power to change the rules, once in power, to further advantage
the majority party and strengthen executive power. Electoral rules that produce
disproportionate representation provide incentives for new and old elites to
mobilize voters in either the Machiavellian intra-elite power struggles illustrated
by the Philippines, or the counter-establishment struggles illustrated by Venezuela.
   Similarly, incumbent polarizing parties typically attempt to govern on their
own and eschew norms for bipartisan or multi-partisan decision-making. As
Figure 1 shows, all of our cases experienced a decline in willingness to compromise during the polarization periods (indicated by willingness to consult with
other actors, or respect for counter-arguments), except for Greece and the
Philippines. Bangladesh started at a low rate of compromise within the bipolar
party system after independence, and continued at a low rate as polarization
intensified after 2010.
   Incumbents must decide how to achieve and then maintain a winning majority
to be able to govern, including whether to continue polarizing or to depolarize.
Here we analyze the common options for a polarizing strategy identified in our
cases of severe polarization, and in the last section we return to theoretical
options to depolarize. The strategies to maintain power that are most pernicious
for democracy, then, are to govern unilaterally without consulting the opposition,
to ally with smaller parties to form a majority, to coopt the opposition, or to
repress dissent, discussed here:

  a.	Govern with own majority and without consultation with the opposition,
      contingent on electoral rules and popular mobilization capacity. Hungary
      (Fidesz), Turkey (AKP), the Philippines (Estrada), and the United States
      (Trump). In South Africa, the ANC has been the dominant majority party
      since 1994, but re-polarization is only incipient.
  b.	Ally with smaller, extreme parties, when unable to gain a majority on their
      own. This was the case at least initially for polarizing parties in Thailand,
      Bangladesh, Poland, and Venezuela. In Greece, Syriza allied with an
      extreme populist party on the opposite side of the ideological extreme.
  c.	Defang the opposition by cooptation, co-habitation, or power-sharing settlement. Zimbabwe’s two episodes illustrate ZANU-PF’s strategy of d    ­ efanging
                                                         (text continues on p. 253)


250                                                              THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


                                    Figure 1
      Country Scores on Freedom, Press Freedom, Parties Willingness to Consult,
                   and Respect for Counterarguments, 2000–2016

                                                The United States of America
                 9
                 7
                 5
                 3
                 1
                      2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                                                            Thailand
              10.00


               9.00


               8.00


               7.00


               6.00


               5.00


               4.00


               3.00


               2.00


               1.00


               0.00
                      2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017


                                                            Turkey
              10.00


               9.00


               8.00


               7.00


               6.00


               5.00


               4.00


               3.00


               2.00


               1.00


               0.00
                      2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017


                                                                                                                  (continued)


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies                                                    251

                                        Figure 1 (continued)
                                                           Venezuela
              10.00


               9.00


               8.00


               7.00


               6.00


               5.00


               4.00


               3.00


               2.00


               1.00


               0.00
                       2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017


                                                           Hungary
              10.00


               9.00


               8.00


               7.00


               6.00


               5.00


               4.00


               3.00


               2.00


               1.00


               0.00
                       2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                                                           Philippines
               10.00


                9.00


                8.00


                7.00


                6.00


                5.00


                4.00


                3.00


                2.00


                1.00


                0.00
                        2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017


                                                                                                                    (continued)


252                                                      THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


                                Figure 1 (continued)
                                                     Greece
      12.00


      10.00


       8.00


       6.00


       4.00


       2.00


       0.00
               2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

                                                  Bangladesh
       10.00


        9.00


        8.00


        7.00


        6.00


        5.00


        4.00


        3.00


        2.00


        1.00


        0.00
               2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017


                                                  South Africa
       10.00


        9.00


        8.00


        7.00


        6.00


        5.00


        4.00


        3.00


        2.00


        1.00


        0.00
                2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017


                                                                                                            (continued)


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies                            253

                                    Figure 1 (continued)
                                                  Zimbabwe
      10.00

       9.00

       8.00

       7.00

       6.00

       5.00

       4.00

       3.00

       2.00

       1.00

       0.00
              2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017


                          Legend:

                                       Mean freedom rang reversed (0—10)

                                       Press freedom reversed (0-10)

                                       Range of consultaon (0-10)

                                       Pares respect for counterarguments (0-10)


Data Sources: Freedom House, freedomhouse.org: Mean Freedom Rating was originally on
1–7 scale and converted to 0–10. And then reversed in a way for the highest value to show highest freedom. Press Freedom Reversed was originally on 0–100 scale and converted to 0–10. And
then reversed in a way for the highest value to show highest press freedom. V-Dem Series 7:
Parties Range of Consultation was originally on 0–5 scale and converted to 0–10. Parties Respect
for Counterarguments was originally on 0–5 scale and converted to 0–10. Coppedge et al. (2017).


      the opposition with power-sharing agreements in which specific positions
      are guaranteed for the opposition, but ZANU-PF retains the dominant role.
      As LeBas and Munemo show, such power-sharing settlements do not guarantee de-polarization, particularly once the polarization extends into society,
      and do not necessarily represent a democratizing move.

   To remain in power, incumbent parties may adjust to new circumstances and
develop cocktail strategies. Turkey’s AKP and Erdoğan, for example, have been
combining their main majoritarian strategy with cooptation by regularly recruiting popular and critical politicians from smaller opposition parties into their own


254                                        THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


ranks, and, since 2016, by building alliances with several erstwhile critical
extreme-nationalist parties, some of which are becoming satellite parties.

  d.	Govern through repression. Common practices include legal maneuvers to
      exclude rival candidacies and tilt the electoral playing field, stack the courts,
      or outright repression of dissent and speech—jailing dissidents, curtailing
      civic freedoms, and cracking down on popular protests. Both Turkey and
      Venezuela, in particular, exemplify this strategy in recent years.

Opposition strategies
   As we have argued, polarization is both political and relational (Somer and
McCoy, this volume; McCoy, Rahman, Somer 2018). Thus the reaction of opposition parties and social groups is critical to the dynamics of polarization. Our case
studies demonstrate that the relational component can change over time within
a polarizing episode and within a single country. A rough balance of power
between two poles may entail similar capacities to mobilize people at the polls or
in the streets, resulting in alternating elections or clashing street protests. But a
balance of power may also entail an advantage in numbers in the polls or the
streets, on one side, and an advantage in institutional control on the other. A good
example is Thailand, where the populist Thai Rak Thai party (and its successors)
had a consistent advantage in numbers in the polls, and an ability to mobilize
street protests, while the opposing royalist-elite factions had an institutional
advantage, particularly in the military and the courts, while also mobilizing street
protests. Eventually, with the opposing coalition unable to overcome the populist
electoral advantage, the military staged its culminating coup in 2014.
   Venezuela’s two decades of Bolivarian Revolution demonstrates how the balance of power can shift under polarization. Chávez moved to balance his initial
institutional weakness and legislative minority by proposing a constituent assembly and new constitution, both with electoral rules favorable to his party and
enhanced presidential powers. The resulting power balance gave him a legislative
majority and partial control of major public institutions, while his opposition
mounted massive street protests and a military coup temporarily removed him
from office. After Chávez survived a recall referendum in 2004, a demoralized
opposition ceded legislative control in an ill-conceived electoral boycott, while
Chávez’s party moved to gain control over the Supreme Court, Electoral Council,
media, and civil society organizations. For a decade, Chávez’s party dominated
political decision-making in a unipolar asymmetry, while the society continued to
be polarized, until the political opposition regrouped to win a super-majority in
the 2015 legislative elections. Growing opposition threatening electoral chances
of Chávez’s successor, Nicolás Maduro, led the Maduro government to rely
increasingly on repression of popular protests and dissent, electoral manipulation, and growing authoritarianism to remain in power.
   Opposition political strategies thus include the basic decisions whether to
reciprocate polarizing tactics or try to depolarize politics based on inclusive and
unifying platforms, whether to compromise and share power with the incumbent


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies         255

or unite against the incumbent, and whether to use electoral and institutional
accountability mechanisms (judicial rulings or impeachment proceedings) or
extra-constitutional or nondemocratic efforts to constrain or remove the incumbent, as described below:

  a.	Counter-mobilize and reciprocally polarize. Political oppositions may unite
     to counter the polarizing incumbents’ power either electorally, i.e. by mobilizing voters through new strategies, programs and discourses, in the streets
     through protests, or in the institutions. If they adopt reciprocal strategies
     using polarizing and Manichean discourse they often reinforce the pernicious logic of polarization in a downward spiral that may threaten the democratic system even further. Turkey’s Gezi protests in 2013, for example,
     exemplified massive grassroots mobilization vilifying the government’s polarizing and authoritarian policies and bringing together diverse societal groups
      demanding democratization; but they ended up antagonizing progovernment groups and accelerating polarization, government oppression, and
      democratic breakdown. Stavrakakis (2018) highlights, for example, the
      dehumanizing antipopulist rhetoric not only within Greek politics and
      media, but also at the European Union level, where political leaders and
      journalists referred to the populist challenge to austerity as abnormal, using
      medical terms (Greece as a “corrupt, ailing body”), subhuman terms
      (“Neanderthal, cave man”), or monster terms (“monster of populism, executioner of democracy, beast of populism”) (pp. 53–54). Stavarakakis fears that
      elite refusal to recognize the democratizing aspect of populist challengers
      will further the spiral of pernicious polarization.
      An example of reciprocal norm violation is the tit-for-tat behavior of the
      Republican and Democratic parties in the United States that led to a steady
      erosion of bipartisanship in judicial appointments during the Obama and
      early Trump administrations. The Republican Senate majority finally pulled
      the plug on bipartisan confirmations of Supreme Court justices, with the
      so-called nuclear option when they abandoned the filibuster rule and thus
      any pretense at bipartisan appointments (Abramowitz and McCoy, this volume).
      Counter-mobilization strategies by opposition coalitions created a rough
      balance between two poles (with electoral and/or institutional power) at
      least at times under the polarizing episodes in Bangladesh, Greece, the
      Philippines, Thailand, the United States, Venezuela, Turkey, and
      Zimbabwe.
  b.	Overcome opposition fragmentation. Opposition groups may fail to unite to
      effectively confront a polarizing incumbent party, either because of interparty rivalries or because traditional parties have been rejected by voters in
      favor of new challengers. Yet opposition failures to overcome fragmentation
      that we observe in our cases may also reflect a built-in dynamic of polarization: opposition groups may find it a challenging task to unite without
      employing the strategy of “counter-mobilize and polarize” and face the
      resulting pitfalls we discussed above.


256                                         THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


      With fragmented or disorganized opposition, the incumbent party can more
      easily change the rules and dominate institutions, making it even harder for
      opponents to organize to challenge the now hegemonic party. The experiences
      of Venezuela, Hungary, Turkey, Poland, and Thailand at some point during
      their polarization episode exemplify this pattern, fostering polarization with the
      new elites gaining dominance. In the Philippines, after the forced removal of
      Estrada in 2001, both sides in the bipolar struggle fragmented and realigned,
      with Estrada forces and Aquino forces aligned against Arroyo. This intra-elite
      struggle re-equilibrated with the return of oligarchic democracy under Benigno
      Aquino in 2010, only to be threatened again with the ascent of the illiberal
      populist Rodrigo Duterte.
  c.	Compromise and share power. A variation on the pattern of opposition
      fragmentation is Zimbabwe’s cohabitation, or power-sharing settlements, in
      which the opposition party lost its mobilization capacity once joining in the
      power structure as a junior partner. Such loss of mobilizational capacity may
      not occur whenever the party in question has an ethnic or regional basis.
      This was the case with Turkey’s pro-Kurdish party that partially cooperated
      with the AKP government for the sake of a peace settlement in 2014–15. In
      this situation, however, the ethnic-regional cleavage may reinforce opposition fragmentation and weakness, as indeed happened in Turkey.
  d.	Unconstitutional or nondemocratic means to constrain or remove a polarizing incumbent. In the extreme, oppositions use nondemocratic means to
      try to remove a polarizing incumbent. Examples include the attempted
      coups in Venezuela and Turkey, manipulated impeachment processes in the
      Philippines, and threatened military interventions in Turkey in the AKP’s
      early periods and repeated judicial and military interventions in Thailand.
      The risk here is that such maneuvers threaten to generate a backlash among
      supporters of the beleaguered incumbent and those who oppose antidemocratic actions, increasing and even broadening his/her support.
  e.	Legal institutional means to constrain executive abuse of power. Our cases
      also illustrate many instances of judicial interventions against polarizing
      and authoritarian incumbents where one would be unjustified or hard
      pressed to argue that these interventions were formally unconstitutional.
      Examples are the ongoing legal investigations and threatened impeachment cases against U.S. President Trump (Abramowitz and McCoy, this
      volume), the Constitutional Court case to shut down the AKP in Turkey
      in 2008 (Somer, this volume), and the National Assembly’s votes to investigate and censure Venezuelan President Maduro (García-Guadilla and
      Mallen, this volume).
  f.	Oppose polarization and work for de-polarization. Since we analyze in this
      project only democracies that have been suffering varying degrees of severe
      polarization, our sample is biased against cases where de-polarization strategies were successful. However, our case analyses provide important insights
      regarding the difficulties of this strategy, and examples of attempted and
      partially or locally successful de-polarization to which we return in the last
      section.


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies              257


                      Consequences for Democracy
We mentioned in our introduction to this article that polarization can sometimes
serve useful democratic ends and should not be regarded as a necessarily bad
feature of governance. In this volume, Greece in the 1980s and 1990s, Bangladesh
in the early post-independence years, and even Zimbabwe in the 2000s reflect a
constructive role of polarization in contributing to early institutionalization of
party systems. Two kinds of danger may arise, however, while this is happening.
The first emerges when the consolidation of the polarized blocs occurs asymmetrically, that is one side becomes politically strong, while the other may remain
fragmented. The reasons may be agentic, organizational, or structural, for example, related to the country’s ethnic and ideological makeup. Whatever the underlying reasons, such asymmetry increases the possibility of democratic erosion
under the hegemony of new elites, as happened in Turkey, or under the return
of old elites who feel existentially threatened, as occurred in Thailand.
   The second danger for democracy is when the polarizing parties engage in
aggressive discourse and behavior that delegitimize their opponents and the political
system. They then unleash the dynamics described above and across our cases, often
leading voters to perceive greater polarization than the policy differences among
parties warrant, to discount substantive information, and to develop more confidence in “less substantively grounded opinions” (Druckman, Peterson, and Slothuus
2013). These two perils for democracy can sometimes reinforce each other.
Asymmetry, for example, can induce actors to up the ante vis-a-vis their polarizing
and antagonizing rhetoric, either because of insecurity or hegemonic ambitions.
   Often, a very slippery slope connects the simplification of politics as a struggle
between two major rival blocs, which is a constitutive feature of most polarizing
politics, to the vilification of these rivals and the effective emasculation of any ties
cutting across the dividing line, features of pernicious polarization. Many dynamics that turn polarization pernicious are built-in and hard to control for the very
political actors that initiate it. For example, as soon as a political party begins to
over-simplify political disagreements and vilify its rivals, this also begins to transform the party itself by advantaging less principled actors, at the expense of more
principled actors within the party (Somer, this volume). Likewise, it is not always
clear how opposition actors can respond to polarizing incumbents “constructively.” When they abstain from counter-polarization, for instance by not vilifying
an incumbent, they may be seen as accepting and thus legitimizing the incumbent’s unscrupulous tactics and violation of accepted democratic norms. When
they counter-mobilize with their own polarizing tactics and malign their opponents, on the other hand, they may contribute to pernicious polarization and end
up accelerating democratic erosion (Somer, this volume).
   What is more, the practice of demonizing opponents feeds the unfavorable views of
opposing parties and their supporters, and the emotional reactions of affective polarization that distances party supporters from each other. This social distancing based on
partisanship is evidenced heartbreakingly in the polling in Turkey and United States,
which shows unwillingness to live near, marry into, or have their children play with


258                                         THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


families supporting opposing parties (Somer, this volume; Abramowitz and McCoy, this
volume; McCoy, Rahman, and Somer 2018). The Economist’s Democracy Index even
downgraded U.S. democracy in 2016 for its growing social polarization and its negative
impact on the functioning of democracy (Economist 2017).
   Rhetoric is crucial because political elites give cues to their voters that influence
political attitudes (Zaller 1992, 1994). System-delegitimizing rhetoric, such as the
Polish PiS party’s refrain that the country is “in ruins” due to elite profligate spending (Tworzecki, this volume), or Donald Trump’s dark inaugural speech blaming
past administrations for the “American carnage,” contribute to perceptions of a
democracy deficit. Large sectors of the electorate may then demand systemic
change, despite evidence of positive economic growth and, in the case of Poland,
even strong happiness scores (Tworzecki, this volume; Abramowitz and McCoy,
this volume). Distrust in representative institutions—especially legislatures and
political parties—further undermines the legitimacy of the political system.
   Several of our cases demonstrate how attacks on the media by incumbents
contribute to declining faith in the media and information as well as growing
tolerance of restrictions on free speech for critics and journalists by the incumbents’ supporters. Even with formal censorship absent, individual journalists and
media institutions, like the rest of the citizenry, may feel the pressure of the
“either-or” logic of polarizing politics. They may feel compelled to pick one side
or the other so that they can preserve their jobs or readership, nonpartisan journalism thus becomes increasingly difficult. As Figure 1 shows, all our cases experienced a deterioration in Freedom House’s measure of press freedom during the
periods of intense polarization. Political polarization was associated with a polarized media in all our cases except South Africa, and in the cases moving toward
authoritarianism, an intentional aim to gain government control over private
media, either through outright closures or purchases, or through tax or judicial
harassment (Hungary, Turkey, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe).
   Finally, growing affective polarization and negative partisanship contributes to a
growing perception among citizens that the opposing party and their policies pose a
threat to the nation or an individual’s way of life. Most dangerously for democracy,
these perceptions of threat open the door to undemocratic behavior by an incumbent and his/her supporters to stay in power, or by opponents to remove the incumbent from power (McCoy, Rahman, and Somer 2018; Svolik 2018).
   The cumulative effect of severe polarization as we have defined it here is a
deterioration in the quality of democracy, leading to backsliding, illiberalism, and
in some cases reversion to autocracy. Figure 1 shows the declines in freedom as
measured by Freedom House, while Figure 2 shows the declines in liberal
democracy measured in the Varieties of Democracy database during and in some
cases after the periods of polarization identified in our cases.

Predicting the outcomes for democracies
   One of our key motivating questions is to understand how and when the
expected benign polarization of normal politics becomes transformed into pernicious polarization with harmful consequences for democracy. And further, to


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies                                259

                                     Figure 2
               Liberal Democracy Country Scores and Polarization Episodes

       Bangladesh Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017     Greece Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017


         Source: V-Dem database version 7                  Source: V-Dem database version 7

        Hungary Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017     Philippines Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017


             Source: V-Dem database version 7            Source: V-Dem database version 7
          Poland Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017    South Africa Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017


            Source: V-Dem database version 7                Source: V-Dem database version 7


                                                                                               (continued)


identify the factors that might predict different outcomes for democracy. The
answers may spell the difference between democratic reform and deepening
democratic instability, and democratic collapse.
   We have already discussed the important role of elite behavior and discourse,
and demonstrated the ubiquitous occurrence of demonizing and denigrating
discourse about opponents and critics in polarized contexts. We return to strategic behavior below, but first we consider institutional conditions at the meso and
macro levels of political party systems, electoral systems, and systems of government. We then present a preliminary theory of polarization with pernicious consequences, focusing on the nature of the dividing line and how the balance of


260                                                         THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


                                             Figure 2 (continued)
         Thailand Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017            Turkey Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017


          Source: V-Dem database version 7                         Source: V-Dem database version 7

      United States Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017          Zimbabwe Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017


            Source: V-Dem database version 7                          Source: V-Dem database version 7

              Venezuela Liberal Democracy Index 1980-2017


                  Source: V-Dem database version 7


SOURCE: Coppedge et al. (2017).


power dynamics in the relationship between the political poles inform their
strategies and constrain the outcome for democracy.

Institutional factors: Constraints on executive power and destabilizing aspects
of polarization, or incentives for polarization and de-democratization?
   Institutions alone neither explain when pernicious polarization occurs, nor can
they definitively resolve it. But some institutional factors emerge from our


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies         261

analysis as important facilitating conditions; namely, the nature of the electoral
system, powers delegated to the head of government, and strength and use of
accountability mechanisms.

    Electoral system. We find that the most extreme cases of polarization among
our countries emerge in contexts of majoritarian electoral systems that produce
a disproportionate representation for the majority or plurality party, and that,
once in power, the polarizing parties and incumbents attempt, and often succeed,
in engineering additional constitutional and legal changes to enhance their
­electoral advantage. In one case that disproportionate system backfired when the
 Venezuelan opposition finally won a two-thirds majority in government with a
 popular vote of only 56 percent after 15 years of the Bolivarian Revolution.
    Proportional representation electoral systems do not guarantee escape from
pernicious polarization, though, if they employ majoritarian-enhancing mechanisms. For example, Turkey has a proportional representation system but also a
high threshold for parties to win seats (10 percent of the votes), along with a
disproportionate distribution of seats favoring rural areas. The Greek electoral
system, after 2012, awards a “bonus” of fifty seats to the largest party, which
helped Syriza to gain a majority.
    As McCoy, Rahman, and Somer (2018), and Vegetti (this volume) point out,
the winner-take-all logic produced by institutional rules in disproportionate
majoritarian electoral systems, combined with the psychological elements of the
“us-versus-them” discourse employed in severely polarized party systems, provide perverse incentives for de-democratization. The zero-sum perceptions of
such systems led governing parties to further work to cement their electoral
advantages with revised electoral formulas, gerrymandered electoral redistricting, restrictive voter registration, and other such constitutional and legal reforms
in Bangladesh, Hungary, Turkey, the United States, and Venezuela. The resulting electoral immobilism entrenched with institutional disproportionate rules
contributes to the extension of political polarization to the societal level, and
makes polarization even more difficult to overcome (Vegetti, this volume).

   System of government. Whether a country is a parliamentary or presidential
democracy alone does not seem to determine incentives for polarization. Instead,
the determining factor appears to be direct election of the head of government,
the powers attributed to the executive by constitutional authority, and a majoritarian electoral system giving disproportionate representation to the largest party. As
indicated in Table 2, among our cases, five are presidential systems with direct
elections, while six are parliamentary with relatively strong prime ministers (in
Turkey and Thailand, the powers of chief executive were enhanced prior to
polarization). Nevertheless, nine of the eleven have disproportionate representation: seven with majoritarian electoral systems (single member districts or mixed
electoral systems) and two with proportional representation electoral systems with
bonus to the largest party.


262                                            THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


                                          Table 2
                                    Institutional Factors


                                                         System of Government

                                                 Directly elected
                                                    president             Parliamentary

Electoral System Majoritarian (or PR           Philippines            Bangladesh
                  with bonus)                  Turkey (since 2014)*   Hungary
                                               United States          Greece
                                               Venezuela              Turkey (until 2017)*
                                               Zimbabwe               Thailand
                   Proportional                Poland (limited        Poland
                                                ­powers)              South Africa

*Turkey’s parliamentary system with a strong president changed to direct election of president
in 2014 and then to an executive presidential system in 2017.


   Party system institutionalization. The level of party system institutionalization
does not appear to predict the rise of polarizing leaders (whether populist or national
liberation), nor the outcome for democracy. Our cases include highly institutionalized
party systems (United States, Bangladesh, Hungary, Turkey, Poland), moderately
institutionalized systems (Zimbabwe, Venezuela), and weak systems (Philippines,
Thailand) according to Varieties of Democracy (Coppedge 2018). The cases with the
least pernicious polarization—South Africa, Greece—have strong systems.

   Accountability institutions. Institutional constraints on executive abuse of
power via mechanisms of accountability and checks and balances can be a doubleedged sword under polarization. Among our cases, we see both democratic and
undemocratic uses of accountability institutions by oppositions to constrain executive abuse of power, as well as the undemocratic use of such institutions by an
autocratizing party/incumbent to maintain power and weaken its challengers.
Thus the strength of these institutions, as well as the motivations of the coalitions
that dominate them, are crucial to determine whether they play a democratizing
or autocratizing role.
   Slater and Arugay (2018) contrast the Machiavellian strategies of street protest
and constitutional hardball used by political actors unable to compete electorally
in intra-elite power struggles in Thailand and the Philippines with Madisonian
strategies of relying on constitutional mechanisms to constrain executive overreach in Taiwan and Indonesia. In Turkey and Venezuela, antipopulist forces had
sufficient presence in the military, courts, and bureaucracies to restrain populists
in the early years. But they soon resorted to extraconstitutional measures to strive
to contain the populists’ electoral advantages, rather than conducting the coalition-building, democratizing internal reform and voter mobilization necessary to
compete at the ballot box (Somer; Garcia-Guillen and Mallen, this volume). In


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies           263

turn, Erdoğan and Chávez transformed those very institutions over time and
populated them with loyalists. They then used the accountability institutions in
an undemocratic way against opponents and internal dissenters in an increasingly
repressive manner.


           Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization’s
                     Harm to Democracy
We have argued that agency plays a fundamental role in pernicious polarization
in democracies, and that both supply and demand factors are important. On the
demand side, popular grievances or elite disaffection leading to intra-elite power
struggles underlie all our cases. Yet on the supply side (the political leaders), the
most pernicious polarizations involve divisions that are brought to the forefront
of the national agenda or even manufactured by elites. Grievances and latent
cleavages exist, but they are most often activated, exploited, or distorted—in the
sense that the normal complexity of politics is wiped out and cross-cutting and
otherwise de-polarizing identities are rendered politically irrelevant—by political
elites who choose the issue or grievance to highlight and create the divisive usand-them perceptions.
   We find that the relation between political actors and the political use of
polarization as a strategy predict its effects. That is, just as crucial as the supply
of polarizing figures is the reaction of opponents. If they adopt similar polarizing
strategies rather than internal reforms and unequivocally prodemocracy electoral
mobilization and civic engagement, they are likely to provoke outcomes of either
“careening” or a hegemonic party with autocratizing tendencies.
   Figure 3 presents two conditioning factors that we consider to be critical in
predicting the severity of polarization and its potential consequences for democracy: polarization formed around formative rifts, and the relative balance of
power in electoral mobilizing capacity of the two camps. These factors shape the
political uses of polarization and the reactions of political actors to it, as well as
the possibilities for a polity to handle its polarizing episode democratically.
   We hypothesize that polarizations shaped around formative rifts are more
enduring and pernicious. As discussed above, unresolved historical debates over
what constitutes the core component of national identity or the basis of citizenship rights seem to underlie contemporary polarizations in Bangladesh, Zimbabwe,
Turkey, South Africa, and the United States. We hypothesize that the cleavages
formed around these unresolved national debates are particularly difficult for
politics precisely because they involve state identity and belonging. As LeBas
(2018, 61) suggests, “Pre-existing binary narratives of group belonging and citizenship make polarization more devastating when it occurs” by rendering intergroup disputes more difficult to resolve through bargaining.
   While LeBas posits this type of polarization is more likely to generate violence
and democratic breakdown, we argue that it is more likely to have the negative
consequences for democracy described in this article because it questions who


264                                         THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


has the right to live in a polity as a full citizen—membership vs. non-membership—and whether one group can claim exclusive legitimacy to represent the
citizens in government. Polarization thus becomes threatening and causes mutual
polarizing reactions in a relational way, leading to democratic erosion. It becomes
an enduring feature of democratic politics because the competing political identities extend into the society such that even if one camp is able to dominate over
the other and temporarily defuse the polarization episode, the latent polarization
residing in the society will facilitate its resurgence unless the political actors take
constructive steps toward resolving the national debates.
    We further hypothesize that the relative balance of power between the poles,
and, in particular, the existence of cross-class parties capable of mobilizing popular electoral support, shapes the strategies of political actors and the dynamics of
polarization. Where the party system has developed competing mass-based parties, political actors are more likely to engage in electoral competitions even
when formative rifts around competing foundational myths about the heroes and
villains of national independence and national identity lead to severe polarization,
such as in Bangladesh. However, if some exogenous or self-imposed condition or
crisis, or a long-lasting problem such as corruption, weakens attachment to traditional parties and opens the door to political outsiders, the relative balance of
power shifts, as does the political calculation of political actors. When capacity for
electoral mobilization is or becomes very unbalanced, access to institutional
sources of power become important in shaping the dynamics of polarization. As
Slater and Arugay (2018) argue, contemporary polarizations in South East Asia
result from changes ushering in disequilibria between the two fundamental
accountability mechanisms of democracy: vertical accountability of voting, and
horizontal accountability of restraints on executive power.
    In cases where the opposition either never had or lost the capacity to match
the electoral mobilization capacity of the new populists, opponents are likely to
turn to institutional sources of power in the courts, military, and bureaucracy.
Where attempts to use institutional mechanisms to constrain or defeat a polarizing leader fail, the incumbents can consolidate their institutional power through
constitutional changes and majoritarian politics. Indeed, in many of our cases
such as the Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, and Venezuela, the opponents at some
point became impatient and resorted to extraconstitutional measures to try to
remove the incumbent, rather than democratize internally and rebuild their electoral mobilization capacity. In other cases, like Hungary and Zimbabwe after the
second polarizing period in the 2000–08, the oppositions weakened and divided,
unable to constrain the hegemonic party.
    Thus, as indicated in the top, right of Figure 3, a rough balance of electoral
mobilization capacity and politics polarizing around formative rifts is expected to
lead to sustained polarizing politics and likely alternation of power with diminishing
quality of democracy, until one side gains the upper hand through court appointments and electoral law changes to enhance their electoral advantage, as happened
in Turkey and Bangladesh. Even if polarization is temporarily defused with one
party consolidating its power, it is likely to reemerge as the society remains polarized with the failure to address the underlying issues of the formative rifts.


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies                                                  265

                                                                            FIGURE 3
                                                            Predicted Outcomes of Pernicious Polarization


                                                             POLARIZATION AROUND FORMATIVE RIFT

                                                                           YES                              NO

                                                             Predicted Outcome: ENDURING Predicted Outcome:
  (both poles have cross-class parties with mobiliSYMMETRICAL                 INDETERMINATE
     MASS-INCLUDING PARTY SYSTEM


                                                              POLARIZATION WITH          Hungary (populist transforms
                                                              DEMOCRATIC EROSION          traditional Party)
                                                                                         Poland (populist transforms
                                                      YES
            INSTITUTIONALIZED


                                                             United States                ­traditional Party)
                  zation capacity)


                                                             Zimbabwe                    Venezuela (trad. party system
                                                             Bangladesh                    weakens/realigns)
                                                             Turkey                      Greece (trad party system
                                                             South Africa                  ­weakens/realigns)
                                                             Predicted Outcome: SHORT-        Predicted Outcome:
                                                              LIVED POLARIZATION               CAREENING or OLD
                                                              CRISES WITH RETURN OF            ELITES RETURN
                                                      NO


                                                              OLD ELITES AND                   ­EXTRA-CONSTITIONALLY
                                                              DEMOCRATIC COLLAPSE
                                                                                              Thailand
                                                             [Egypt]                          Philippines


    The exception to this outcome arises in one of two conditions: i) when opposing elites refrain from delegitimizing polarization tactics, and focus instead on
mutual tolerance and restraint, as in early post-apartheid South Africa under
Nelson Mandela; or ii) a hegemonic party chooses to reform internally, holding
its own leaders accountable and democratizing its own organizational structures.
While the removal of corrupt leaders in Zimbabwe and South Africa in 2017 by
their own parties theoretically holds out the latter possibility, early signs indicated that the hegemonic stance of ZANU-PF under Emmerson Mnangagwa
and the ANC under Cyril Ramaphosa may continue. Likewise, as of mid-2018,
the Republican Party in the United States continued to resist holding President
Trump accountable for his divisive rhetoric and policy stances upending U.S.
foreign policy, while it allowed the special counsel to continue its investigation
into Russian meddling in the 2016 elections and any collusion with the Trump
campaign.
    In the top, right of Figure 3, where a rough balance of electoral capacity is
paired with polarization around more contemporary issues and grievances, the
outcome is indeterminant. It theoretically should allow for a compromise around
the polarizing issue and thus defuse the polarizing crisis. However, the outcome
depends in part on the reaction of oppositions. As Slater and Arugay (2018)
argue, in Indonesia and Taiwan opponents treated polarizing figures who abused
executive power with patience and constraint, engaging in Madisonian tactics to


266                                        THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


check the executive through constitutional mechanisms, and thus avoid destabilizing polarizing politics.
    In contrast, oppositions that weaken and divide internally, and/or engage in
extra-constitutional, undemocratic attempts to remove a polarizing leader, are
likely to see a counter-productive outcome as sympathy builds for the attacked
leader and opposing parties fail to carry out the organizational rebuilding and
voter outreach necessary to challenge the incumbent in the electoral arena. For
example, over the course of the 18-year Bolivarian movement led by Chávez and
Maduro, the opposition veered among extra-constitutional maneuvers, attempts
at mobilizing a popular challenge in the streets and ballot box, and internal rivalries and divisions. The 2002 coup attempt against Chávez allowed him to paint
his opponents and the U.S. government, who backed them as undemocratic, and
they failed to defeat him electorally until his death. After uniting, the opposition
finally won decisively the 2015 legislative elections. In response, Maduro resorted
to increasingly undemocratic and repressive measures, backed by the military,
even as the society depolarized and the vast majority turned against him. In
Figure 3 Turkey is another example, where an apparent 2016 coup attempt
against Erdoğan paralyzed, divided and garnered condemnation even from the
opposition, and gave him an excuse to further crackdown on his opponents and
purge the civil service, teachers and university professors, and courts of any suspected dissidents.
    In Hungary, the opposition also engaged in polarizing tactics, with each bloc
refusing to accept the other as legitimate political interlocutors. Fidesz’s early
supermajority electoral win, however, in 2010 allowed it to further change the
electoral laws to its advantage and cement its dominant status. The inability of
opposition parties to form a single coalition impeded their ability to challenge
Fidesz’s electoral dominance.
    International influence can also play an important role. Greece’s EU membership and debt made it particularly vulnerable to regional pressure. Andreadis and
Stavrakakis in this volume describe the Greek ambivalence toward the EU—a
majority joined in blaming EU financial elites for the unpopular austerity measures, but they are divided on the question of EU membership. This helps to
explain Syriza’s skirting of the issue by accepting a compromise over its debt
rather than risk ouster from the EU, while continuing to blame outsiders for the
difficult economic situation.
    The bottom, left of Figure 3 is a null set for our study, but we might think of
the short-lived democratic transition after Mubarak’s removal in Egypt as an
example of a majoritarian party government under the leadership of Morsi’s
Muslim Brotherhood government that polarized around formative rifts related to
religion and state identity. The opposition’s inability to unite and pose an electoral
challenge to the Muslim Brotherhood, along with Morsi’s polarizing behavior, led
the ­opposing political elite to support a military coup to remove Morsi from
power.
    The bottom, right of Figure 3 represents cases with an imbalance in electoral mobilization capacity and polarizing politics around more temporal issues
such as contemporary grievances or the polarizing behavior of a populist and


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies          267

aggrandizing figure. The cases of Thailand and the Philippines examined in
this volume fit this category, with an outcome of careening between oligarchic
democracy and mass populist democracy. We expect this outcome as intraelite power struggles play out using the different resources of democratic
power—institutional horizontal accountability mechanisms and vertical electoral mobilization.


              Future Research and Possible Antidotes
                    to Pernicious Polarization
What factors might prevent self-propagating pernicious polarization? And once it
is set in motion, is it possible to turn around? We have argued that pernicious
polarization emerges from the interaction of grievances around representation
deficits, economic inequities, or cultural clashes, and the politicization of those
grievances by elites using polarizing strategies for their own purposes. As societies change by growing more racially or religiously diverse, more wealthy or
unequal, or suffer crises of the economy or corruption, then perceptions of inequity or changing social status can fuel demands for change and spur the supply of
polarizing leaders and parties, often by bundling populist rhetoric together with
other polarizing strategies. The reaction of once-dominant groups and elites to
the rise of challengers is crucial in determining the path toward polarization. As
Slater notes, “Democratic stability rests upon the readiness of oligarchies to
expand substantive access to the political system, not simply upon the willingness
of rising opposition to ‘work within the system’” (2013, 60).
   Every society and democracy has inequalities and hierarchies. If those on the
bottom are allowed a political representation and respected as a challenger,
rather than outright enemy, a society can have an agonistic, pluralist democracy
rather than an antagonistic and polarized one (Stavrakakis 2018; Mouffe 2014).
But if the newly mobilized actors take an antidemocratic and delegitimizing
stance, such as European fascists did, or contemporary authoritarian populists
do, or if their ascent to political power generates an antipopulist backlash, discrediting and delegitimizing the new actors, it will likely generate an irreversible
logic of polarization locking in the actors. The most likely result is increased
conflict and democratic erosion. Hence, the discourse, actions, and political strategies of the rising new actors as well as those shaping the backlash against them
are crucial.
   While our cases do not offer any definite answers as to how pernicious polarization can be prevented or reversed, they offer indirect insights we aim to
explore in future research. None of our cases suggests that reactionary popular
mobilization in the streets against polarizing actors with illiberal or authoritarian
tendencies proved successful in achieving de-polarizing and democratizing
results, at least by themselves. Judicial attempts—within constitutional boundaries—to constrain polarizing figures prone to the abuse of power are more promising for preventing severe polarization (Slater and Arugay 2018). However, our


268                                         THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY


cases do not offer evidence that they can be effective in reversing polarization
and democratic erosion after the onset of severe polarization, precisely because
the polarized views of the constraining agents and the polarizing figure alike
reduce the legitimacy of the constraint mechanisms.
    Simultaneously, our analysis shows that the most severe examples of polarization followed from some elites’ reframing of their societies’ formative rifts in
divisive and provocative fashions to achieve power, and from opposing elite reactions. Further, the two countries with the steepest democratic erosion resulting
in authoritarian outcomes under new elites (see Figure 2) were the two with the
most ideologically revolutionary aims—the inclusionary transformative cases of
Erdoğan in Turkey and Chávez in Venezuela. All this suggests that the choices
and strategies of incumbent and opposition elites in political and civil societies—
who can act as both gatekeepers and proactive problem-solvers—can play critical
roles in preventing and reversing pernicious polarization and its negative consequences for democracy. Rather than unconstitutional interventions, reactionary
mass mobilization, and even legal sanctions, the most propitious strategy for
prodemocratic elites appears to be developing successful electoral strategies,
making programmatic and organizational internal reforms, and supporting
democratizing institutional reform proposals.
    South Africa, Turkey, and Greece provide useful lessons of within case variation.
Despite Turkey’s long-existing formative rifts, a moderate polarization actually constituted its most promising period with respect to democracy under the AKP in
2002–2007. At that time, the AKP government subsumed its polarization around
the formative rifts under a broader consensus message of EU accession (Somer,
this volume). In this period, the AKP government and the opposition cooperated
for EU-inspired democratic and economic reforms and the government was
checked by strong—albeit semi-authoritarian—horizontal accountability mechanisms, until a constitutional crisis over the new president’s election escalated polarization. Hence, presumably, Turkey could have produced an outcome of democratic
reforms if its political elites had made different choices. This could have happened,
for example, if they had agreed on a president trusted by both sides and worked on
democratizing the semi-authoritarian horizontal accountability mechanisms, and if
the opposition had focused its energies on removing the AKP by programmatically
and organizationally reforming t­ hemselves rather than, as they tried, through popular mobilization and quasi-­constitutional judicial interventions.
    Apartheid South Africa was democratized with institutional and electoral
arrangements that carried their own seeds of both vulnerability and resistance to
repolarization. Although the first post-apartheid presidency under Nelson
Mandela avoided the polarizing temptation, successive leaders in the African
National Congress used their dominant-party status to grow increasingly hegemonic and self-serving. As Southall points out in this volume, the ANC’s origin as
a national liberation movement allowed it to conflate self-determination with
democracy and to claim that it alone represented the will of the people, similar
to the Bangladesh and Zimbabwe cases. The party’s comparative advantage in
mobilizing voters led its political opponents to turn to horizontal accountability
mechanisms—namely the courts—for redress, while ANC figures attacked the


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies                           269

judiciary as “counter-revolutionary.” At the same time, the electoral hegemony of
the ANC meant there was little political polarization and little choice in representation, making the hegemonic party-state subject to corruption and authoritarian tendencies. Consequently, Zuma’s ouster in 2017 and Ramaphosa’s early
reforms held out the possibility of another potentially positive democratizing
outcome—that of a hegemonic party reforming itself from within, and possibly
dissolving the basis of polarization by addressing representation deficits.
   Greece’s early postauthoritarian democratic politics were heavily polarized at
the political and societal levels as partisans of the two major parties took on party
identity as social identity. Yet Andreadis and Stavrakakis argue in this volume that
this was benign polarization in that it strengthened two programmatic parties that
began to converge rather than diverge. Depolarization was disrupted with the
2009 economic crisis, much like a decade earlier in Venezuela, when the twoparty system in each case was blamed by voters for mismanagement and even
collusion (thus too little polarization), and outsiders emerged. Syriza’s establishment-vilifying rhetoric actually masked a more complex polarization in Greece
along three dimensions (austerity/anti-austerity; pro- and anti-European sentiment; and a broader consensus blaming EU actors for the painful austerity
requirements). The outcome was a unique coalition of Left and Right extremes
and a period of political instability. Greece’s current vulnerability is a deficit in
representation of the anti-EU membership position, leaving open space for a new
political actor to emerge with potentially pernicious consequences.
   These cases indicate at least three potential depolarization mechanisms: democratizing internal reforms of the hegemonic party; democratizing reforms and electoral mobilization by the opposition; and pluralist political representation options for
various cleavages to participate within the party system. But we need more theoretically informed and fine-tuned research on depolarization strategies in different
cases. By definition, any nonpolarized democracy could offer an example where
strategies of depolarization or preventing severe polarization were effectively implemented by actors representing the opposition, the government, or both. However,
our cases, too, entail many opposition actors who partially or predominantly
attempted to depolarize their polities with different degrees of success, such as
South Africa’s Democratic Alliance (DA) or U.S. legislators who have been working
across the aisle under the Obama and Trump administrations. Future research
should place more emphasis on analyzing the dynamics and dilemmas of the depolarization strategies and what makes these strategies more or less successful.


                                          References
Abramowitz, Alan I. 2010. The disappearing center: Engaged citizens, polarization, and American democracy. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Berman, Sheri. 2017. The pipe dream of undemocratic liberalism. Journal of Democracy 28 (3): 29–38.
Bermeo, Nancy. 2016. On Democratic Backsliding. Journal of Democracy 27 (1): 5–19.
Bermeo, Nancy Gina. 2003. Ordinary people in extraordinary times: The citizenry and the breakdown of
   democracy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


270                                                    THE ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY

Campbell, James E. 2016. Polarized: Making sense of a divided America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press.
Coppedge, Michael, John Gerring, C. H. Knutsen, S. I. Lindberg, S. E. Skaaning, J. Teorell, and J. Krusell.
    2017. V-Dem Methodology v7. Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) Project.
Coppedge, Michael, John Gerring, C. H. Knutsen, S. I. Lindberg, S. E. Skaaning, J. Teorell, and J. Krusell.
    2018. V-Dem Methodology v8. Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) Project.
Druckman, James N., Erik Peterson, and Rune Slothuus. 2013. How elite partisan polarization affects
    public opinion formation. American Political Science Review 107 (1): 57–79.
Economist. 2017. Democracy Index 2017. Available from https://www.eiu.com/topic/democracy-index.
Fitch, Andy. 2018. Partisan conflict separate from the policy: Talking to Frances Lee. LARB (blog).
    Available from https://blog.lareviewofbooks.org/interviews/partisan-conflict-separate-policy-talkingfrances-lee/.
Gaertner, S. L., J. F. Dovidio, P. A. Anastasio, B. A. Bachman, and M. C. Rust. 1993. The common ingroup
    identity model: Recategorization and the reduction of intergroup bias. European Review of Social
    Psychology 4 (1): 1–26.
Handlin, Samuel. 2018. The logic of polarizing populism: State crises and polarization in South America.
    American Behavioral Scientist 62 (1): 75–91.
Hawkins, Kirk A., Ryan E. Carlin, Levente Littvay, and Cristóbal Rovira Kaltwasser, eds. 2018. The ideational approach to populism: Concept, theory, and analysis. 1st ed. New York, NY: Routledge.
Inglehart, Ronald, and Pippa Norris. 2016. Trump, Brexit, and the rise of populism: Economic have-nots
    and cultural backlash. Harvard Kennedy School Working Paper, RWP16-026, Cambridge, MA.
Kinder, Donald, and Cindy Kam. 2010. Us against them: Ethnocentric foundations of American opinion.
    Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kinder, Donald R., and Nathan P. Kalmoe. 2017. Neither liberal nor conservative: Ideological innocence
    in the American public. 1st ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
King, Ryan D., and Darren Wheelock. 2007. Group threat and social control: Race, perceptions of
    minorities and the desire to punish. Social Forces 3:1255–80.
Kongkirati, Prajak. 2016a. Thailand’s polarization: Intra-elite struggle and mass based conflict. Atlanta, GA:
    Georgia State University.
Kongkirati, Prajak. 2016b. Thailand’s failed 2014 election: The anti-election movement, violence and
    democratic breakdown. Journal of Contemporary Asia 46 (3): 467–85.
Kongkirati, Prajak. 2016c. Evolving power of provincial political families in Thailand: Dynastic power,
    party machine and ideological politics. South East Asia Research 24 (3): 386–406.
Kuran, Timur. 1995. Private truths, public lies: The social consequences of preference falsification.
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
LeBas, Adrienne. 2006. Polarization as craft: Party formation and state violence in Zimbabwe. Comparative
    Politics 38 (4): 419–38.
LeBas, Adrienne. 2018. Can polarization be positive? Conflict and institutional development in Africa.
    American Behavioral Scientist 62 (1): 59–74.
Lee, Frances E. 2016. Insecure majorities: Congress and the perpetual campaign. 1st ed. Chicago, IL:
    University of Chicago Press.
Lepore, Jill. 2018. These truths: A history of the United States. 1st ed. New York, NY: W.W. Norton &
    Company.
Levin, Shana. 2004. Perceived group status differences and the effects of gender, ethnicity, and religion on
    social dominance orientation. Political Psychology 25 (1): 31–48.
Luce, Edward. 2018. The retreat of Western liberalism. Reprint edition. New York, NY: Grove Press.
Mahoney, James, and Kathleen Thelen, eds. 2010. Explaining institutional change: Ambiguity, agency, and
    power. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Mardin, Şerif. 1973. Center-periphery relations: A key to Turkish politics. Daedalus 102 (1): 169–90.
McCoy, Jennifer, and Francisco Diez. 2011. International mediation in Venezuela. Washington, DC:
    United States Institute of Peace.
McCoy, Jennifer, Tahmina Rahman, and Murat Somer. 2018. Polarization and the global crisis of democracy: Common patterns, dynamics, and pernicious consequences for democratic polities. American
    Behavioral Scientist 62 (1): 16–42.


Toward a Theory of Pernicious Polarization and How It Harms Democracies                                 271

Mounk, Yascha. 2018. The undemocratic dilemma. Journal of Democracy. Available from https://www
    .journalofdemocracy.org/article/undemocratic-dilemma.
Mudde, Cas, and Cristobal Rovira Kaltwasser. 2017. Populism: A very short introduction. 2nd ed. New
    York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Mutz, Diana C. 2018. Status threat, not economic hardship, explains the 2016 presidential vote.
    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 (19): E4330–39.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, institutional change and economic performance. New York, NY:
    Cambridge University Press.
Outten, H. Robert, Michael T. Schmitt, Daniel A. Miller, and Amber L. Garcia. 2012. Feeling threatened
    about the future: Whites’ emotional reactions to anticipated ethnic demographic changes. Personality
    & Social Psychology Bulletin 38 (1): 14–25.
Palonen, Emilia. 2009. Political polarisation and populism in contemporary Hungary. Parliamentary
    Affairs 62 (2): 318–34.
Sidanius, Jim, and Felicia Pratto. 2001. Social dominance: An intergroup theory of social hierarchy and
    oppression. 1st ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shils, Edward. 1961. Centre and periphery. In The logic of personal knowledge: Essays presented to
    Michael Polanyi, ed. Michael Polanyi, 117–30. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Skitka, Linda J., and G. Scott Morgan. 2014. The social and political implications of moral conviction.
    Political Psychology 35 (February): 95–110.
Slater, Dan. 2013. Democratic careening. World Politics 65 (4): 729–63.
Slater, Dan, and Aries A. Arugay. 2018. Polarizing figures: Executive power and institutional conflict in
    Asian democracies. American Behavioral Scientist 62 (1): 92–106.
Somer, Murat. 2001. Cascades of ethnic polarization: Lessons from Yugoslavia. The ANNALS of the
    American Academy of Political and Social Science 573:127–51.
Somer, Murat. 2007. Moderate Islam and secularist opposition in Turkey: Implications for the world,
    Muslims and secular democracy. Third World Quarterly 28 (7): 1271–89.
Somer, Murat. 2014. Moderation of religious and secular politics, a country’s ‘centre’ and democratization.
    Democratization 21 (2): 244–67.
Somer, Murat. 2017. Conquering versus democratizing the state: Political Islamists and fourth wave
    democratization in Turkey and Tunisia. Democratization 24 (6): 1025–43.
Somer, Murat, and Jennifer McCoy. 2018. Déjà vu? Polarization and endangered democracies in the 21st
    century. American Behavioral Scientist 62 (1): 3–15.
Stavrakakis, Yannis. 2018. Paradoxes of polarization: Democracy’s inherent division and the (anti-) populist
    challenge. American Behavioral Scientist 62 (1): 43–58.
Svolik, Milan W. 2018. When polarization Trumps civic virtue: Partisan conflict and the subversion of
    democracy by incumbents. Available from https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/campuspress.yale.edu/
    dist/6/1038/files/2018/09/polarization_manuscript-2ex9y63.pdf.
Tajfel, Henri, and J. C. Turner. 1979. An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In The social psychology
    of intergroup relations, eds. W. G. Austin and S. Worchel, 33–37. Boston, MA: Brooks/Cole.
Zaller, John R. 1992. The nature and origins of mass opinion. 1st ed. New York, NY: Cambridge University
    Press.
Zaller, John R. 1994. Strategic politicians, public opinion, and the Gulf crisis. In Taken by storm: The
    media, public opinion, and U.S. foreign policy in the Gulf War, 1st ed., eds. W. Lance Bennett and
    David L. Paletz, 250–74. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Zsolt, Enyedi. 2005. The role of agency in cleavage formation. European Journal of Political Research 44
    (5): 697–720.