Journal of Communication ISSN 0021-9916


ORIGINAL ARTICLE


Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure
Natalie Jomini Stroud
Department of Communication Studies, Annette Strauss Institute for Civic Participation, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA


   Today, people can easily select media outlets sharing their political predispositions, a
   behavior known as partisan selective exposure. Additional research is needed, however, to
   better understand the causes and consequences of partisan selective exposure. This study
   investigates the relationship between partisan selective exposure and political polarization
   using data from the National Annenberg Election Survey. Cross-sectional results show
   strong evidence that partisan selective exposure is related to polarization. Over-time
   analyses document that partisan selective exposure leads to polarization. Some evidence
   supports the reverse causal direction, namely that polarization leads to partisan selective
   exposure. Implications for the study of media effects and normative implications—both
   positive and negative—are discussed.

doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2010.01497.x


In 2004, it was not difficult to find venomous attacks on the U.S. presidential nominees
in the media. Conservative Rush Limbaugh lambasted Democratic presidential
nominee John Kerry, saying ‘‘I got something to say to you: I would never run for
president without a plan and I’ll be damned if I can figure out what your plan is!’’
On the other end of the spectrum, liberal Al Franken was furious with incumbent
Republican President George Bush; ‘‘I get angry at this President for putting us
into this war without thinking it through.’’ Examples such as these raise important
questions about the effects of partisan media. Do partisan media, such as the shows
hosted by Limbaugh and Franken, lead people to develop more polarized attitudes
toward political candidates? Or, do these types of programs merely attract already
polarized audiences? Or—of potentially even graver concern—is there a spiral, as
Slater (2007) would suggest, whereby partisan outlets both attract and create ever
more polarized audiences? These questions are directly related to our understanding
of the relationship between media effects and selective exposure, the idea that people
purposefully select information matching their viewpoints.
    Over the past half-century, the relationship between media effects and selective
exposure has undergone a transformation. Selective exposure made its debut as an
explanation for why the media may have limited effects on people’s beliefs. The logic

Corresponding author: Natalie (Talia) Jomini Stroud; e-mail: tstroud@mail.utexas.edu

556                       Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

was that if people were not exposed to information that conflicted with their beliefs,
then they would have little impetus to change their beliefs. Often cited as part of this
tradition, Klapper (1960) noted, ‘‘Selective exposure, selective perception, and selective retention have been shown . . . to be typically the protectors of predispositions and
the handmaidens of reinforcement’’ (p. 64). Early researchers commonly investigated
variables that would enhance or constrain people’s tendency to engage in selective
exposure. Concepts similar to polarization, for example, were investigated as variables
that would influence an individual’s propensity to seek out congenial information.
    Today, however, selective exposure is seen differently. Far from the preamble of
a limited-effects perspective, selective exposure may serve as an important predictor
of media effects. In his widely read Republic.com, for example, Sunstein (2001) issued
a strong warning about the consequences of exposure to consonant views; with
particular reference to the Internet, he cautioned that polarization and fragmentation
could result, leading to less tolerance and more extreme views. This is not to
say that all outcomes of exposure to likeminded ideas are necessarily normatively
undesirable—some research suggests that exposure to likeminded interpersonal
views is connected to higher levels of political participation (see, e.g., Mutz, 2002). As
this discussion shows, contemporary research no longer equates selective exposure
with limited effects. This study returns to the tension between selective exposure and
media effects to examine whether polarization is a cause, a consequence, or both a
cause and a consequence of partisan selective exposure (the selection of politically
likeminded media outlets).


Partisan selective exposure leads to polarization
Polarization, the strengthening of one’s original position or attitude, has received
much scholarly attention. There is little disagreement in the scholarly literature
that political elites have become increasingly polarized over the past several decades
(Fiorina, Abrams, & Pope, 2005; Jacobson, 2003). Whether patterns of polarization
in the mass public resemble elite polarization, however, is an issue that truly polarizes
academics (see Nivola & Brady, 2006). Some claim that the public has become
increasingly polarized (e.g., Jacobson, 2003) whereas others argue that it has not
(e.g., Fiorina et al., 2005). An analysis of the media may play an important role in
mediating this debate. After all, the media are the primary way in which elite opinions
are transmitted to the public. Those selecting media outlets that cohere with their
political leanings may be particularly likely to adopt elites’ polarized attitudes. Indeed,
Mutz (2006) notes that although partisan selective exposure should lead partisans to
‘‘polarize further in the direction of their original views, this consequence is not yet
well documented’’ (p. 227). Accordingly, this study first evaluates whether engaging
in partisan selective exposure contributes to political polarization before turning to
an evaluation of the reverse causal direction.
    There are good reasons to anticipate that media consumers will develop more
extreme and polarized attitudes when they are exposed to views that resonate

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association               557


                                                                                                                   14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                       N. J. Stroud

with their own. Research on likeminded interpersonal groups provides important
justification for a link between congenial media consumption and polarization
(Jones, 2002; Stroud, 2007; Sunstein, 2001). Huckfeldt, Mendez, and Osborn (2004),
for example, found that those discussing politics with politically likeminded others
have more polarized political attitudes compared with those discussing politics with
others holding divergent political preferences. This finding is arguably relevant to
investigating the effects of exposure to homogeneous media messages. In particular,
the two primary explanations that have been offered for why groups tend to polarize
should continue to apply in mediated contexts. The first, and stronger, mechanism
underlying the tendency for likeminded groups to develop polarized attitudes is that
group members are exposed to persuasive arguments (Isenberg, 1986). By hearing
arguments that are in favor of their side, group members are persuaded to develop
more polarized attitudes in the direction of the group norm. In an identical process,
consuming media advancing a shared point of view should provide people with
information supporting their perspective and therefore, produce polarization.
     The second explanation for polarization is social comparison, whereby people
want to be perceived well by their fellow group members and hence adjust their
opinions toward the perceived group mean. Although this is not as easily transferred
into a mediated context, there may be a social element to information selection as well.
Chaffee and McLeod (1973), for example, found that those who discussed a political
campaign more often were more likely to seek out partisan political information.
Perhaps individuals who belong to homogeneous interpersonal groups seek more
likeminded information because this information has social utility—people may
want their discussion partners to think they are well informed or they may feel that
it is expected that they contribute to the group’s argument pool. Related work has
shown that homogeneous discussion groups prefer supportive over contradictory
information to a degree larger than the preference for supportive information among
individuals (Schulz-Hardt, Frey, Lüthgens, & Moscovici, 2000). By seeking and
internalizing more favorable partisan information for social reasons, individuals may
become more polarized. As this discussion demonstrates, the mechanisms proposed
for why homogeneous interpersonal networks lead to polarization also could explain
why exposure to consonant media messages would lead to polarization.
     Although there are theoretical reasons to predict a link between the selection
of likeminded media outlets and polarized attitudes, the empirical evidence to date
is inconclusive. First, although a number of studies have found evidence of a link
between media exposure and polarization (Adams et al., 1985; Bimber & Davis, 2003;
Druckman & Parkin, 2005; Jones, 2002; Lavine, Borgida, & Sullivan, 2000; Mendelsohn & Nadeau, 1996; Stroud, 2007; Taber & Lodge, 2006), there are exceptions where
scholars have found no evidence of polarization (see, e.g., Ball-Rokeach, Grube, &
Rokeach, 1981; Paletz, Koon, Whitehead, & Hagens, 1972) or where scholars have
raised questions about whether likeminded media exposure enhances polarization
(Meffert, Chung, Joiner, Waks, & Garst, 2006). Second, none of the studies to
date have attempted to consider people’s media exposure patterns comprehensively.

558                    Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

Several have examined whether a one-time media exposure, such as viewing a film, is
related to polarization (Adams et al., 1985; Ball-Rokeach et al., 1981; Bimber & Davis,
2003; Lavine et al., 2000; Paletz et al., 1972; Stroud, 2007; Taber & Lodge, 2006). Others have investigated the relationship between polarization and exposure to a single
media type, whether exposure to newspapers (e.g., Druckman & Parkin, 2005), Rush
Limbaugh (e.g., Jones, 2002), or websites (e.g., Bimber & Davis, 2003). This study
examines people’s media use patterns more comprehensively by looking at their newspaper, radio, cable news, and web consumption. Third, several previous studies have
relied on data gathered at a single point in time, making it difficult to draw conclusions about the causal direction of a relationship between polarization and media use
(e.g., Lavine et al., 2000; Mendelsohn & Nadeau, 1996). Using more comprehensive
data about people’s media diets, this study evaluates the following hypothesis:

    H1: Partisan selective exposure will lead to polarized political attitudes.


Polarization leads to partisan selective exposure
The research detailed above supports the interpretation that partisan selective
exposure should cause higher levels of polarization. The reverse causal direction,
namely that polarization motivates partisan selective exposure, is also possible.
Investigations of the causal direction are particularly appropriate because variables
similar to polarization have been proposed not as consequences, but as antecedents
of selective exposure.
    In earlier literature on selective exposure, certainty and confidence were proposed
as causes of selective exposure. Although certainty, or ‘‘the perceived probability
that [one’s choice] is better than the alternatives’’ (Mills & Ross, 1964, p. 552), and
confidence, or how assured one feels about one’s perspective compared with others,
have been treated separately in the empirical literature on selective exposure, they
are related concepts. For example, in attitude research, certainty and confidence
measurements are highly related and have been combined into scales for analysis
(see, e.g., Berger & Mitchell, 1989). The similarity between confidence, certainty, and
polarization is striking. A polarized individual who is maximally favorable toward a
preferred candidate and maximally unfavorable toward a disliked alternative arguably
has very high levels of confidence and certainty. In addition to the similarity of these
concepts on their face, operationalizations are similar in the literature.1 Several have
operationalized polarization as the absolute value of the difference between ratings
of two different candidates or political parties (see, e.g., Beasley & Joslyn, 2001;
Fiorina et al., 2005; Mutz, 2002). Similarly, Ziemke (1980) included a measure of
the relative difference in favorability toward the candidates in predicting selective
exposure. Several experimental studies investigating moderators of selective exposure
have manipulated certainty by having subjects choose between either (a) two equally
attractive products or (b) between two differently attractive products (e.g., Mills,
1965). This is quite similar to investigating whether polarized political attitudes

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association               559


                                                                                                                   14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                       N. J. Stroud

influence exposure, where polarized citizens would find two candidates differently
attractive and nonpolarized citizens would find two candidates similarly attractive.
As these studies document, concepts similar to polarization have been considered
antecedents of selective exposure.
    Some posit that certainty/confidence should be negatively related to selective
exposure. In this case, the more confident or certain the individual, the less likely
s/he would be to engage in selective exposure (Festinger, 1964). Given high levels of
certainty or confidence, exposure to discrepant information may not be dissonance
arousing. Instead of avoiding information, individuals may seek out discrepant
information because of their confidence or certainty that they would be able to
refute it. Alternatively, if a position is not held with certainty, individuals may seek
confirmatory information in order to maintain the position. If this were in fact the
case, then relationships between selective exposure and polarization in cross-sectional
analysis may be underestimated if the positive (selective exposure → polarization)
and negative (polarization → selective exposure) influences cancel each other out.
    Evidence supporting a negative relationship between certainty/confidence and
selective exposure, however, is mixed. A series of experiments aiming to understand
the conditions that motivate selective exposure were conducted in the 1960s. Although
the use of experiments has the potential to clear up ambiguity in causal direction,
selective exposure experiments that have manipulated certainty and confidence have
yielded conflicting results. Manipulating certainty by giving subjects differentially
preferred products from which to choose, Mills (1965) found that less certain
individuals were more likely to seek supportive information; however, Thayer (1969)
failed to replicate this finding. Another series of experiments manipulated confidence
by giving subjects feedback on their performance on several judgment tasks—some
subjects were given positive feedback about their performance and others were
given negative feedback. After receiving feedback, subjects made a preliminary
judgment on another task and then were given the opportunity to read additional
information before making a final judgment. They were permitted to choose from
information either confirming or disconfirming their preliminary judgment. Their
information selection was recorded and used to measure selective exposure. Although
Canon (1964) found evidence that confidence decreased preferences for confirmatory
information, others using similar designs failed to replicate the findings (Freedman,
1965; Lowin, 1969; Schultz, 1974). Other studies aiming to manipulate certainty were
unsuccessful; Mills and Ross (1964), for example, used a self-report certainty measure
to calculate their results after their manipulation of certainty failed. In doing so, they
captured only a cross-sectional, not a causal, relationship.
    Inconsistency persists in more recent studies. Albarracín and Mitchell (2004)
found that those with higher levels of defense confidence were more likely to
select uncongenial information. Yet Knobloch-Westerwick and Meng (2009) showed
that attitude certainty predicted fewer counterattitudinal article choices and Stroud
(2007) reported that the political film Fahrenheit 9/11 attracted already polarized
audiences. Most relevant to this study, Ziemke (1980) proposed certainty as an

560                    Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

independent variable that motivates selective exposure to campaign information.
Using survey data, Ziemke found a relationship such that ‘‘the more certain [the
voters] are, the more they select information supportive of their candidate’’ (p. 505).
Ziemke’s research suggests that certainty may be positively related to polarization
and theoretically proposes that certainty precedes polarization. Given inconsistent
theories and findings, this study examines both causal directions of the relationship
between polarization and partisan selective exposure.
    It is also necessary to revisit the relationship between certainty/confidence and
selective exposure because of the range of topics that previous research has addressed.
It is possible that certainty and confidence operate differently in encouraging or
discouraging selective exposure depending on whether we consider business case
studies (Freedman, 1965), commercial products (Mills, 1965), or politics (Ziemke,
1980). For some, politics likely is more salient and yields a stronger emotional
response than commercial products or business case studies. Accordingly, this
study examines the relationship between certainty/confidence and selective exposure
within the context of a political campaign.

    RQ1: Does polarization/certainty lead to partisan selective exposure?

   By examining people’s use of several different media types (e.g., newspaper, radio,
cable news, and Internet) and focusing on a political context, this study adds to the
current literature by providing a more comprehensive picture of the relationship
between partisan selective exposure and polarization/certainty. Furthermore, it
provides additional insight into the causal direction of the relationship between these
important concepts.

Method
The data for this study come from the 2004 National Annenberg Election Survey
(NAES; Romer, Kenski, Winneg, Adasiewicz, & Jamieson, 2006), a random-digit-dial
telephone survey conducted throughout the 2004 U.S. presidential campaign. Two
types of data are used here. First, the NAES employed a rolling cross-sectional design.
In this design, a fresh set of telephone numbers that have not been previously dialed
are released into the field each day of interviewing. In addition, telephone numbers
where a respondent has not completed the survey are redialed. Using this method,
data from each day of interviewing includes both those respondents who were reached
on the first dial and those who required more dials before completing the survey. This
design yields daily random cross-sections of the population. The response rate for the
rolling cross-sectional survey was 22% (calculated using the RR1 formula from the
American Association for Public Opinion Researchers). For this study, rolling crosssectional data collected between June 9 (the day after the final primary election) and
November 1, 2004 are used. Second, the NAES included four different panel surveys
conducted at various points during the election season. Panels were conducted
around the Democratic National Convention (prewave 7/16-7/25/04, postwave

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association               561


                                                                                                                   14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                       N. J. Stroud

7/30-8/8/04, and recontact rate 42%), the Republican National Convention (prewave
8/20-8/29/04, postwave 9/3-9/13/04, and recontact rate 36%), the debates (prewave
9/20-9/29/04, postwave 10/14-10/24/04, and recontact rate 41%), and the general
election (prewave 7/15-11/1/04, postwave 11/4-12/28/04, and recontact rate 43%).

Measurement: Controls
The analysis described in this study controls for demographic, political orientation, and media use variables. Two control variables are particularly important to
mention: strength of ideology/partisanship and political knowledge. Theoretically,
these variables should be related to both polarization/certainty and partisan selective
exposure. Those with higher levels of political knowledge are better able to detect
partisan cues that could lead them to select politically likeminded media and to
develop polarized attitudes. Those with higher levels of political knowledge also may
be better able to counterargue the information, thus yielding polarization even in the
face of contradictory information. Furthermore, the more information respondents
have in favor of their opinion, the more certain they may feel about their opinion.
Those with stronger partisan attachments are more motivated to select politically
likeminded media, to process information in ways that support their existing partisan predispositions, and to hold their attitudes with certainty. Empirical research
supports these ideas: citizens with higher political knowledge and stronger partisan
attachments are more likely to select likeminded news (Garrett, 2009; Stroud, 2008;
Taber & Lodge, 2006) and to hold more extreme attitudes (Meffert et al., 2006; Taber
& Lodge, 2006). For these reasons, all models include both political knowledge and
partisan/ideological extremity as controls. A description of all of the control variables
used in the analysis is included in the Appendix.

Measurement: Polarization
Although there are numerous ways in which polarization could be operationalized,
this study uses respondent reactions to Bush and Kerry in the 2004 presidential
election. Survey respondents were asked, ‘‘Now for each of the following people
in politics, please tell me if your opinion is favorable or unfavorable using a scale
from 0 to 10. Zero means very unfavorable, and 10 means very favorable. Five
means you do not feel favorable or unfavorable toward that person. Of course you
can use any number between 0 and 10.’’ They were asked this question both for
Bush (M = 5.25, SD = 3.71) and for Kerry (M = 5.07, SD = 3.29). Polarization,
computed by taking the absolute value of the difference between ratings of Bush and
Kerry for each respondent, had a mean of 5.56 and a standard deviation of 3.22. On
average, respondents rated Bush 5 points more/less favorably than Kerry.
    Typically, polarization is conceptualized in terms of the absolute position of
attitudes. At first glance, the present polarization measure may seem somewhat
different from this standard definition. For some types of attitude objects (e.g.,
attitude toward a public policy issue), polarization might be measured using a scale
from very favorable to very unfavorable. More extreme positions on the scale would

562                    Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

signal more polarization. Note that this scale is bipolar, capturing attitudes about two
sides of a single issue. Favorable attitudes toward the pro side of the issue/unfavorable
attitudes toward the con side of the issue are on one pole of the attitude scale.
Favorable attitudes toward the con side of the issue/unfavorable attitudes toward
the pro side of the issue are on the other pole of the attitude scale. To measure
polarization, one could use a folded measure of favorability/unfavorability with
higher values corresponding to more extreme attitudes.
    In a similar way, attitudes toward Bush and Kerry can be considered two
poles on a favorability scale. There has been some debate about whether attitudes
toward the Democratic and Republican parties and Democratic and Republican
candidates are appropriately considered as bipolar, with favorable attitudes toward
Democrats/unfavorable attitudes toward Republicans on one pole and favorable
attitudes toward Republicans/unfavorable attitudes toward Democrats on the other
pole. Several scholars have provided evidence, however, that public reactions to
Democrats and Republicans are unidimensional and bipolar (Craig, Martinez,
& Kane, 1999; Green, 1988; Greene, 2005), as are public reactions to national
Democratic and Republican political figures (Craig et al., 1999; Green, 1988). The
measure employed in this study, therefore, is consistent with previous ways of
conceptualizing polarization for other attitude objects. Polarization also has been
measured similarly in prior literature examining partisan polarization (see, e.g.,
Beasley & Joslyn, 2001; Fiorina et al., 2005; Mutz, 2002).

Measurement: Partisan selective exposure
In order to operationalize partisan selectivity, two steps were taken, as discussed in
Stroud (2008). The first step was to identify the partisan leanings of different outlets.
The second step was to operationalize the selection of politically congenial media
outlets. Both of these steps are discussed in more detail below.

Newspapers
Those reading a newspaper in the past week were asked to identify the newspaper they
read most often. The newspapers were categorized based on the 2004 presidential
candidate endorsed by the newspaper. Certainly using newspaper endorsements
to measure newspapers’ political leanings lacks some precision; however, several
studies have found a relationship between newspaper endorsements and news media
content (D’Alessio & Allen, 2007; Druckman & Parkin, 2005; Kahn & Kenney, 2002).
Of the 29,298 respondents who identified the newspaper they read most often, 77%
of responses were classified. Other responses were unable to be classified because the
named newspaper could not be found or was indeterminate (e.g., respondents noting
that they read the Times without specifying which Times), or because the newspaper
did not provide their endorsement information after being contacted. Of the classified
respondents, 35% read a newspaper that endorsed Bush and 46% read a newspaper
that endorsed Kerry. The remainder mainly read newspapers that did not endorse a
candidate. From this, two dichotomous variables were created: one measuring reading

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association               563


                                                                                                                   14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                       N. J. Stroud

newspapers endorsing Kerry, and one measuring reading newspapers endorsing
Bush.

Political talk radio
Respondents who listened to talk radio or National Public Radio (NPR) in the past
week were asked to identify the radio shows and hosts to which they listened. Their
responses were categorized as liberal or conservative based on the self-identifications
of radio hosts/shows, the ideological affiliations ascribed to the programs by trade
magazines (e.g., Talkers), or how prior research classified the programs. Seventy-eight
percent of responses were categorized using this method. The remaining responses
either were unable to be located or were indeterminate (e.g., some respondents only
said the radio station frequency, e.g.,‘‘101.1’’). Of those who said that they listened to
political talk radio (including those naming nonpolitical programs and those naming
radio programs that were not able to be categorized), 28% listened to conservative
programs and 25% listened to liberal programs.

Cable news
Respondents who watched cable news were asked to name the news network they
watched most often. Thirty-four percent reported viewing FOX most often, 45%
CNN, and 12% MSNBC. Although all three identify as objective outlets, content
analytic investigations suggest that FOX coverage tends to be more supportive of
conservative and Republican beliefs in comparison to other outlets (Aday, Livingston,
& Hebert, 2005; Center for Media and Public Affairs, 2003, 2004a, 2004b; Groseclose
& Milyo, 2005; Project for Excellence in Journalism, 2004). Based on these studies,
CNN and MSNBC are treated as consistent exposure for liberals and Democrats and
FOX is treated as consistent exposure for conservatives and Republicans.

Political Internet
Respondents with Internet access who had obtained information about the campaign
for president online in the past week were asked to identify the websites that they
accessed. Twelve percent stated that they had accessed a candidate website, 60% a news
organization website, and 32% another website. Responses from those identifying
another website were coded as to whether the websites leaned toward conservative
or liberal perspectives. A subset of responses were coded by a second coder to ensure
that the classification system was reliable (Krippendorff’s, 2004; α = .96). Of the
3,343 open-ended responses to this question, 2,712 were able to be categorized. Most
respondents named nonpartisan or nonpolitical websites (e.g., AOL). Twelve percent
named conservative-leaning websites (e.g., rushlimbaugh.com) and 14% named
liberal-leaning websites (e.g., moveon.org). Again, two variables were created: one for
accessing liberal-leaning websites and one for accessing conservative-leaning websites.

Evaluating the media use classifications
To evaluate the validity of the coding scheme described above, several analyses were
conducted. First, analysis was conducted to determine whether liberals and Democrats

564                    Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

were more likely to use Kerry-endorsing newspapers, CNN/MSNBC, liberal radio,
and liberal websites and whether conservatives and Republicans were more likely to
use Bush-endorsing newspapers, FOX, conservative radio, and conservative websites.
Analysis confirmed that this was the case (Stroud, 2008). In addition, an analysis
was conducted to evaluate whether there were overlaps in media usage. It would be
expected, for example, that watching CNN/MSNBC would increase the probability
that someone would read a Kerry-endorsing newspaper, listen to liberal radio, and
access liberal websites. Analysis documented that consuming one source classified
as liberal increased the likelihood of consuming another liberal source and that
consuming one source classified as conservative increased the likelihood of consuming
another conservative source.

Indices of media exposure
As the media use variables formed two clusters, two indices of media exposure were
created from the outlet-specific measures of partisan media use. The first index,
exposure to conservative media outlets, was created by summing reading newspapers
endorsing Bush, listening to conservative talk radio, watching FOX, and accessing
conservative websites (all survey respondents, including those who did not consume
any media and thus received a 0 on this scale, M = 0.57, SD = 0.76, range 0–4). The
second index, exposure to liberal media outlets, was created by summing reading
newspapers endorsing Kerry, listening to liberal talk radio, watching CNN/MSNBC,
and accessing liberal websites (M = 0.78, SD = 0.80, range 0–4). Please note that
the terms ‘‘liberal media’’ and ‘‘conservative media’’ are used loosely and merely to
delineate two patterns of media consumption.

Partisan selective exposure
Partisan selective exposure not only involves the selection of partisan media, but also
one’s political predispositions. Therefore, including the respondents’ political predispositions was necessary in order to capture partisan selective exposure. Respondent
political predispositions were assessed by asking respondents a series of questions
about their political ideology and partisanship; descriptive statistics are included
in the Appendix. Ideology and partisanship were significantly correlated (r = .49,
p < .001) and were combined into a single measure of political leanings with larger
values indicating stronger liberal Democratic leanings and smaller values indicating
stronger conservative Republican leanings (range = 2–10, M = 5.84, SD = 2.14).
    To model partisan selective exposure’s effect on polarization, interaction terms
between respondent partisan media use and respondent political leanings were used
in the analysis. Including an interaction term allows for conclusions about (a) the
effect of consuming conservative and liberal media and (b) whether this effect is
enhanced when the respondents’ political leanings correspond with the media outlet,
as would be anticipated by the idea of partisan selective exposure. In the over-time
analysis, after taking into account how polarized respondents were in the prewave,
the interaction term allows for an evaluation of whether using liberal [conservative]

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association               565


                                                                                                                   14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                       N. J. Stroud

media enhances polarization among liberals [conservatives] in the postwave more
than others. To model the effect of polarization on partisan media use (the reverse
causal argument that polarized attitudes motivate partisan media use), interactions
between ideology/partisanship and polarization are used to predict partisan media
use. After taking into account prewave partisan media use, the interaction term allows
for an evaluation of whether polarized respondents are more likely to consume any
type of partisan media or whether polarized respondents are more likely to consume
likeminded partisan media in the postwave. Here, the analysis allows for conclusions
about whether more polarized conservative Republicans and more polarized liberal
Democrats consume more conservative and liberal media, respectively.


Results
The first analytic step employed here is to evaluate whether the interactions between
ideology/partisanship and partisan media use are significant in predicting political
polarization.
    The regression analyses in Table 1 document a cross-sectional relationship
between polarization and partisan selective exposure that exists in the presence
of extensive controls. Liberal Democrats consuming more liberal media outlets
hold more polarized attitudes relative to other liberal Democrats. Conservative
Republicans consuming more conservative media outlets hold more polarized attitudes relative to other conservative Republicans. The interactions also document
that uncongenial media use is related to lower levels of polarization compared to
politically likeminded others.
    One concern may be that media use is a reflection of community standards. If the
regressions from Table 1 are rerun using hierarchical linear modeling with survey
respondents clustered into congressional districts and the percentage of the Bush vote
within each congressional district included as a control, the results are unchanged.
Furthermore, if each individual media type is modeled separately (e.g., Polarization
= Media type + Ideology/partisanship + Media type × Ideology/partisanship +
Controls), the interaction term is significant (p < .05) for Bush-endorsing and Kerryendorsing newspapers, conservative and liberal talk radio, FOX, CNN/MSNBC, and
conservative Internet use. The main effect of liberal Internet use is significantly
(p < .05) and positively related to polarization. Thus, there is evidence that partisan
selective exposure is related to polarization irrespective of media type.
    Over-time analyses allow for an investigation into whether partisan selective
exposure leads to polarization. These analyses are warranted because a plausible
reverse causal argument can be made, namely, that more polarized individuals are
motivated to engage in selective exposure. In evaluating the causal direction, two
techniques are used. First, cross-lagged panel regressions are computed using the four
two-wave panel surveys. Yanovitzky and Cappella (2001) use a similar type of analysis
in their investigation of the effects of political talk radio. Adopting their discussion to
the current application, they note that including a lagged measure of the dependent

566                    Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

Table 1 Regression Analyses Predicting Political Polarization

                    Model 1                                                           Model 2
                                          ∗
Ideology/                         −0.03                            Ideology/                    −0.03∗∗
  partisanship                     (0.01)                            partisanship                (0.01)
Conservative                      −0.02                            Liberal                      −0.14∗∗∗
  media use                        (0.04)                            media use                   (0.04)
                                  −0.13∗∗∗                                                       0.15∗∗∗
Interaction                                                        Interaction
                                   (0.02)                                                       (0.02)
R-square                             0.21                          R-square                      0.21
Notes: Unstandardized coefficient (SE).
Ideology/partisanship (higher values correspond with stronger liberal Democrats) and liberal/
conservative media use are mean centered. Control variables (see Appendix) are included
in the model, but are not shown here. Full tables, including control variables, are available
upon request. Interaction results are unchanged if ideology or partisanship is used in place
of ideology/partisanship. As there is some controversy regarding whether NPR should be
counted as a liberal outlet (consider that Cappella, Turow, & Jamieson, 1996, coded Diane
Rehm of NPR as liberal and Talk of the Nation as moderate), analysis was repeated without
NPR-users classified as liberal talk radio listeners. Results are unchanged. Although liberal and
conservative media use are modeled separately, if they are included as independent variables
in the same model, the interactions with ideology/partisanship remain significant (p < .001)
and in the same directions.
N = 12,840. ∗ p < .05. ∗∗ p < .01. ∗∗∗ p < .001.


variable in a regression model allows one to evaluate whether the independent
variable of interest independently contributes to the dependent variable. To the
extent that partisan selective exposure contributes to polarization after controlling
for the respondents’ prewave polarization, there is evidence that partisan selective
exposure is causally related to polarization. The reverse causal direction also is
tested.
    For each of the four panel surveys, four analyses were run. Two tested
whether conservative and liberal partisan selective exposure, respectively, contributed to polarization. The other two tested whether polarization contributed to
(a) conservative media use or (b) liberal media use. All models followed the same
general form: Dependent Variable (DV)time 2 = DVtime1 + Independent Variable
(IV)time 1 + Ideology/partisanship(IP) + (IVtime 1 × IP) + Controls. A summary of
these 16 analyses is provided in Table 2.
    In Table 2, the first three rows of coefficients correspond to the DNC panel survey,
the next three rows correspond to the RNC panel survey, then the debates panel
survey, and finally, the general election panel survey. The first and second columns
of coefficients test whether conservative or liberal media use, respectively, enhance
polarization. The third and fourth columns of coefficients test whether polarization
leads to conservative or liberal media use.

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association                 567


                                                                                                                   14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                       N. J. Stroud

Table 2 Sixteen Panel Regression Analyses Predicting Polarization and Partisan Media Use

                  Media Use → Polarization                                   Polarization → Media Use
                   Conservative     Liberal media                           Conservative      Liberal media
                    media use            use                                 media use             use

DNC panel
Ideology/             0.09∗             0.08+         Ideology/                −0.03∗              0.03+
  partisanship        (0.04)            (0.04)          partisanship           (0.01)              (0.02)
Conservative/          0.01             −0.11         Polarization              0.002               0.01
  liberal             (0.13)            (0.11)                                 (0.01)              (0.01)
  media use
Interaction          −0.10+             0.09+         Interaction              −0.001              0.004
                     (0.05)             (0.05)                                 (0.004)            (0.005)
R-square              0.64               0.64         R-square                   0.65              0.53
N                     537                             N                          533
RNC panel
Ideology/             −0.03             −0.04         Ideology/                 −0.01               0.03∗
  partisanship        (0.04)            (0.04)          partisanship            (0.01)             (0.01)
Conservative/          0.09             −0.17         Polarization             −0.0001             0.0002
  liberal media       (0.13)            (0.12)                                  (0.01)             (0.01)
  use
Interaction           −0.05             0.10∗         Interaction              −0.004              0.01
                      (0.05)            (0.05)                                 (0.004)            (0.004)
R-square               0.66              0.66         R-square                   0.58              0.50
N                      579                            N                          578
Debates panel
Ideology/             0.10∗             0.09∗         Ideology/                −0.04∗∗            0.05∗∗∗
  partisanship        (0.04)            (0.04)          partisanship            (0.01)            (0.01)
Conservative/          0.14             −0.03         Polarization             −0.003              0.002
  liberal media       (0.12)            (0.11)                                  (0.01)            (0.01)
  use
Interaction            0.004            0.002         Interaction               −0.01              0.004
                      (0.05)            (0.05)                                 (0.004)            (0.004)
R-square                0.65             0.65         R-square                   0.58              0.53
N                       675                           N                          670
General election panel
Ideology/           −0.05∗∗             −0.05∗        Ideology/               −0.04∗∗∗            0.05∗∗∗
  partisanship        (0.02)            (0.02)          partisanship            (0.01)             (0.01)
Conservative/        −0.04              −0.13∗        Polarization               0.01             −0.001
  liberal media       (0.06)            (0.05)                                 (0.004)            (0.004)
  use
Interaction          −0.06∗             0.04+         Interaction             −0.005∗∗            0.004∗
                      (0.02)            (0.02)                                 (0.002)            (0.002)
R-square                0.48             0.48         R-square                   0.57              0.45
N                      3,298                          N                         3,276
Notes: Unstandardized coefficient (SE).
Independent variables ideology/partisanship (higher values correspond with stronger liberal
Democrats), polarization, and partisan media use are mean centered. Control variables (see
Appendix), and prewave values of the dependent variable are not shown in this table.
+ p < .10. ∗ p < .05. ∗∗ p < .01. ∗∗∗ p < .001.


568                    Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

    As Table 2 shows, in five of eight cases, the interaction between partisan media use
and ideology/partisanship is significant or marginally significant. In these instances,
there is evidence that partisan selective exposure is related to higher polarization
and that the consumption of uncongenial media is related to lower polarization. In
addition, the interaction between polarization and ideology/partisanship is significant
in two of eight cases (both in the general election panel) in predicting partisan media
use. Although the panel analyses provide somewhat stronger support for the idea that
partisan selective exposure leads to higher levels of polarization, there is an indication
that polarization also contributes to higher partisan selective exposure.2
    The second strategy used to evaluate the direction of causality is time series
analysis. Here, the relationship between the average level of partisan selective
exposure for each day and the average level of polarization for each day are analyzed.
Only those respondents identifying as conservative Republicans or liberal Democrats
are included in the analysis because clear determinations about congenial exposure
can be made only for these respondents. For conservative Republicans, the number
of conservative outlets consumed is used as a measure of partisan selective exposure.
For liberal Democrats, the number of liberal outlets consumed is used as a measure
of partisan selective exposure. Using the daily average amount of partisan selective
exposure (the average number of likeminded media types used) and the daily average
polarization, time series analysis is employed. If the mean level of polarization from
prior days (at time t-1, t-2, etc.) is significantly related to the mean value of partisan
selective exposure (at time t), then there is an indication that polarization leads
to partisan selective exposure. Alternatively, if the mean level of partisan selective
exposure from prior days contributes to the mean value of polarization, then there is
evidence that partisan selective exposure leads to political polarization.3
    The results of this analysis provide additional evidence that partisan selective
exposure leads to polarization. At the aggregate level, political polarization increases
linearly over time (time trend B = 0.006, SE = 0.001, p < .001). This documents
that over the course of the 2004 general election season, partisans became increasingly
polarized. Partisan selective exposure has a significant contemporaneous effect on
polarization—on any given day, the mean level of polarization is related to the
mean amount of partisan selective exposure (partisan selective exposure B = 0.95,
SE = 0.30, p < .01). Furthermore, partisan selective exposure has a marginally
significant lagged effect on polarization (B = 0.52, SE = 0.30, p < .10). Higher
values of partisan selective exposure on a prior day contribute to higher levels of
polarization on subsequent days. This is additional evidence that partisan selective
exposure contributes to polarization. Alternatively, there is no evidence that lagged
polarization leads to partisan selective exposure.


Discussion
This study demonstrates that partisan selective exposure contributes to political
polarization. The results extend single-exposure findings (e.g., Taber & Lodge, 2006)

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association               569


                                                                                                                   14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                       N. J. Stroud

to show that patterns of partisan selective exposure are broadly related to higher levels
of polarization. Furthermore, these results document that research findings showing a
relationship between homogeneous social network exposure and political polarization
(Huckfeldt et al., 2004) can be extended to homogeneous media exposure. These
findings also supplement work by Prior (2007). Prior focuses on compositional
change in the electorate—whereby less polarized individuals participate less—yet
he notes that his model does not explain trends of increasing polarization in the
electorate. This study finds that partisan selective exposure can help to explain rising
polarization in attitudes toward political candidates.
    This study also investigates the causal direction of the relationship, finding
that congenial media exposure contributes to higher polarization. Limited evidence
suggests that polarization leads to congenial media exposure, suggesting the possibility of a spiral effect (Slater, 2007). This type of a spiral could indicate nonlinear
growth of both polarization and partisan selective exposure up to a maximum level.
In isolating the effect of partisan selective exposure, however, this study examines
only one variable’s influence on polarization. There certainly are other variables
that influence polarization and that may counteract some of the effects of partisan
selective exposure; discussing politics with nonlikeminded others, for example,
may limit polarizing effects (Huckfeldt et al., 2004). Research into other variables
that work in concert with partisan selective exposure to influence polarization is
warranted.
    There are several important limitations of this analysis. First, there are limits to the
generalizability of the conclusions drawn in this study. The data were gathered during
the 2004 U.S. presidential election and whether these results are generalizable to
other contexts demands further examination. Furthermore, whether the relationships
between selective exposure and polarization operate similarly in nonpolitical contexts
requires additional research. Second, the measures of media use employed in
this study, while extensive compared with many other studies, also constrain the
conclusions. For example, open-ended responses to where people went to obtain
information online were gathered only for respondents who said they had gone to a
nonnews organization, noncandidate website. More detailed responses would allow
for more precise measurement. While acknowledging the measurement limitations, it
is worthwhile to note that the cross-sectional relationship between partisan selective
exposure and polarization persists across media types (newspaper, radio, cable news,
and Internet). Third, this study uses two-wave panels to investigate the causal
relationship between polarization and partisan selective exposure. Although this
method has strengths compared with other methods (e.g., cross-lag panel correlations,
see Kessler & Greenberg, 1981), it does not allow for definitive conclusions about
causal direction. This is the case because, for example, one cannot be sure that
different time lags between the pre- and postwave survey would not yield different
conclusions (Kessler & Greenberg, 1981; Slater, 2004). By incorporating both the
panel survey analysis and the time series analysis, however, this study provides
stronger evidence that polarization does result from partisan selective exposure.

570                    Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

    This study has a number of strengths in terms of contributing to existent literature.
In employing a large-scale, national-sample survey, findings from the NAES are
generalizable to the broad population. Furthermore, although understanding the
attitudinal effects of a single exposure are helpful (e.g., Adams et al., 1985; BallRokeach et al., 1981; Paletz et al., 1972; Stroud, 2007; Taber & Lodge, 2006), this
analysis uses measures designed to more closely capture the polarizing effects of one’s
mediated environment. This study consistently documents that partisan selective
exposure contributes to political polarization. Finally, this study provides some
guidance on how long it takes for the media to contribute to polarization by using
four different panels with different amounts of time between the pre- and postwave
and analysis conducted by looking at daily variation at the aggregate level. Although
this study cannot provide unequivocal conclusions about the appropriate lag length,
the empirical findings here can help to guide future theoretical advancements. In
this study, there was evidence that partisan selective exposure contributed to political
polarization in both the short and long term. If these patterns persist throughout
additional analyses in other contexts, this provides insight for developing theories
about why the media have this effect. Theoretical accounts of the relationship between
polarization and partisan selective exposure must take care to explain both shorter
and longer term effects.
    In early research and theory, selective exposure was proposed as a rationale
behind limited media effects. For example, in their ambitious overview of findings
regarding human behavior, Berelson and Steiner (1964) noted that ‘‘people tend to
see and hear communications that are favorable or congenial to their predispositions;
they are more likely to see and hear congenial communications than neutral or
hostile ones’’ (p. 529). This correspondence translates into a limited media effects
perspective because if people are exposed only to views matching their beliefs, then
they are unlikely to change their beliefs. Although this study broadly agrees with
Klapper (1960) that selective exposure is a ‘‘handmaiden of reinforcement’’ and a
‘‘protector of predispositions’’ (p. 64), it significantly parts ways with the limitedeffects perspective. As a handmaiden of reinforcement, the media do not fail to
influence the public. Instead, partisan selective exposure produces more polarized
attitudes. This research points to the importance of considering characteristics of
both the media and the media consumer when analyzing the media’s political
effects. Just as different media outlets may produce different effects, people’s political
predispositions moderate the influence of the media.
    Does this study document something that should concern citizens in a democratic
system? Yes and no. On one hand, partisan selective exposure and polarization may
spark more political participation—a democratically desirable goal (see, e.g., Mutz,
2002). On the other hand, partisan selective exposure and polarization may engender
a less tolerant and more fragmented public. The trick is to devise ways to counteract
any detrimental effects of partisan selective exposure while encouraging the beneficial
effects. Specifically, balancing forces that pull people apart (e.g., partisan selective
exposure and polarization) with forces that pull people together (e.g., shared media

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association               571


                                                                                                                    14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                        N. J. Stroud

experiences) can help to advance this goal (Carey, [1969] 1997; Katz, 1996). The
challenge becomes figuring out how to increase community-building forces in the
face of increasing opportunities for selectivity.

Acknowledgments
I thank Vincent Price, Kathleen Hall Jamieson, and Joseph Cappella for their
comments on previous versions of this manuscript. I also thank Ken Winneg for
his assistance with the content analysis. I am grateful to Kathleen Hall Jamieson for
providing the resources for this project.

Notes
1     This is not to say that certainty and polarization always will be strongly related (see e.g.,
      Krosnick & Petty, 1995). The way in which these variables have been operationalized in
      research on selective exposure, however, suggests a strong relationship.
2     Identical polarization scores can result from different impressions of the candidates. For
      example, one could receive a prewave polarization score of 5 if (a) one rated one
      candidate a 10 and the other a 5 or if (b) one rated one candidate a 5 and the other a 0.
      Analysis evaluated whether these different constellations of prewave candidate
      favorabilities (given similar prewave polarization scores) moderated the relationship
      between partisan selective exposure and polarization. The analysis evaluated whether
      those with room to become more positive toward a favored candidate yet little room to
      become more negative toward the opposition differed from those with room to become
      more negative toward a least favored candidate yet little room to become more positive
      toward a favored candidate. In no instance did the different constellations of prewave
      favorability moderate the relationship between partisan media use and polarization.
3     Before progressing with over-time analysis, the series were evaluated for the presence of
      trends (Diebold, 2004; Romer, 2004). In this study, the variables increased linearly
      during the time period under analysis. Second, the series were evaluated for the presence
      of autocorrelation by inspecting the autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation plots.
      The partisan selective exposure series displayed no evidence of autocorrelation. There
      was some evidence of autocorrelation for the polarization series at a lag of 4.
      Incorporating four lags into the model, however, did not improve the model fit. The
      same results continue to hold if: a lag of polarization is incorporated in the model, if the
      days of the week are controlled in the analysis (this does not improve model fit), or if the
      detrended series are used in the model.


References
Adams, W. C., Salzman, A., Vantine, W., Suelter, L., Baker, A., Bonvouloir, L., et al. (1985).
   The power of ‘‘The Right Stuff’’: A quasi-experimental field test of the docudrama
   hypothesis. Public Opinion Quarterly, 49, 330–339.
Aday, S., Livingston, S., & Hebert, M. (2005). Embedding the truth: A cross-cultural analysis
   of objectivity and television coverage of the Iraq war. Harvard Journal of Press/Politics, 10,
   3–21.

572                     Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

Albarracín, D., & Mitchell, A. L. (2004). The role of defensive confidence in preference for
    proattitudinal information: How believing that one is strong can sometimes be a
    defensive weakness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1565–1584.
Ball-Rokeach, S. J., Grube, J. W., & Rokeach, M. (1981). ‘‘Roots: The Next
    Generation’’—Who watched and with what effect? Public Opinion Quarterly, 45, 58–68.
Beasley, R. K., & Joslyn, M. R. (2001). Cognitive dissonance and post-decision attitude
    change in six presidential elections. Political Psychology, 22(3), 521–540.
Berelson, B., & Steiner, G. A. (1964). Human behavior: An inventory of scientific findings.
    New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Berger, I. E., & Mitchell, A. A. (1989). The effect of advertising on attitude accessibility,
    attitude confidence, and the attitude-behavior relationship. Journal of Consumer
    Research, 16, 269–279.
Bimber, B., & Davis, R. 2003. Campaigning online: The Internet in U.S. elections. New York:
    Oxford University Press.
Canon, L. K. (1964). Self-confidence and selective exposure to information. In L. Festinger
    (Ed.), Conflict, decision, and dissonance (pp. 83–95). Stanford: Stanford University
    Press.
Cappella, J. N., Turow, J., & Jamieson, K. H. (1996). Call-in political talk radio: Background,
    content, audiences, portrayal in mainstream media. Philadelphia: Annenberg Public Policy
    Center.
Carey, J. W. [1969] 1997. The communications revolution and the professional
    communicator. In E. S. Munson & C. A. Warren (Eds.), James Carey: A critical reader
    (pp. 128–143). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Center for Media and Public Affairs. (2003). The diversity debate: Media coverage of
    affirmative action in college education. Washington, DC.
Center for Media and Public Affairs. (2004a). Campaign 2004: The summer: How the media
    covered the presidential campaign during summer 2004. Washington, DC.
Center for Media and Public Affairs. (2004b). Campaign 2004: The media agenda.
    Washington, DC.
Chaffee, S. H., & McLeod, J. M. (1973). Individuals vs. social predictors of information
    seeking. Journalism Quarterly, 50, 237–245.
Craig, S. C., Martinez, M. D., & Kane, J. G. (1999). The structure of political competition:
    Dimensions of candidate and group evaluation revisited. Political Behavior, 21(4),
    283–304.
D’Alessio, D., & Allen, M. (2007). On the role of newspaper ownership on bias in presidential
    campaign coverage by newspapers. In R. W. Preiss, B. M. Gayle, N. Burrell, M. Allen &
    J. Bryant (Eds.), Mass media effects research: Advances through meta-analysis.
    (pp. 429–453). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Diebold, F. X. (2004). Elements of forecasting (3rd ed). Mason, OH: Thomson.
Druckman, J. N., & Parkin, M. (2005). The impact of media bias: How editorial slant affects
    voters. Journal of Politics, 67, 1030–1049.
Festinger, L. (1964). Conflict, decision, and dissonance. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Fiorina, M. P. [with Abrams, S. J., & Pope, J. C.]. (2005). Culture war? The myth of a polarized
    America. New York: Pearson Longman.
Freedman, J. L. (1965). Confidence, utility, and selective exposure: A partial replication.
    Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2, 778–780.

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association               573


                                                                                                                   14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                       N. J. Stroud

Garrett, R. K. (2009). Politically motivated reinforcement seeking: Reframing the selective
    exposure debate. Journal of Communication, 59, 676–699.
Green, D. P. (1988). On the dimensionality of public sentiment toward partisan and
    ideological groups. American Journal of Political Science, 32, 758–780.
Greene, S. (2005). The structure of partisan attitudes: Reexamining partisan dimensionality
    and ambivalence. Political Psychology, 26(5), 809–822.
Groseclose, T., & Milyo, J. (2005). A measure of media bias. The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 120, 1191–1237.
Huckfeldt, R., Mendez, J. M., & Osborn, T. (2004). Disagreement, ambivalence, and
    engagement: The political consequences of heterogeneous networks. Political Psychology,
    25, 65–95.
Isenberg, D. J. (1986). Group polarization: A critical review and meta-analysis. Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 1141–1151.
Jacobson, G. C. (2003). Partisan polarization in presidential support: The electoral
    connection. Congress & The Presidency, 30, 1–37.
Jones, D. A. (2002). The polarizing effect of new media messages. International Journal of
    Public Opinion Research, 14, 158–174.
Kahn, K. F., & Kenney, P. J. (2002). The slant of the news: How editorial endorsements
    influence campaign coverage and citizens’ views of candidates. American Political Science
    Review, 96, 381–394.
Katz, E. (1996). And deliver us from segmentation. Annals of the American Association of
    Political and Social Sciences, 546, 22–33.
Kessler, R. C., & Greenberg, D. F. (1981). Linear panel analysis: Models of quantitative change.
    New York: Academic Press.
Klapper, J. T. (1960). The effects of mass communication. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S. & Meng, J. (2009). Selective exposure to attitude-consistent and
    counter-attitudinal political information. Communication Research, 36, 426–448.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology (2nd ed).
    Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Krosnick, J. A., & Petty, R. E. (1995). Attitude strength: An overview. In R. E. Petty &
    J. A. Krosnick (Eds.), Attitude strength: Antecedents and consequences (pp. 1–24).
    Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lavine, H., Borgida, E., & Sullivan, J. L. (2000). On the relationship between attitude
    involvement and attitude accessibility: Toward a cognitive-motivational model of
    political information processing. Political Psychology, 21, 81–106.
Lowin, A. (1969). Further evidence for an approach-avoidance interpretation for selective
    exposure. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 5, 265–271.
Meffert, M. F., Chung, S., Joiner, A. J., Waks, L., & Garst, J. (2006). The effects of negativity
    and motivated information processing during a political campaign. Journal of
    Communication, 56(1), 27–51.
Mendelsohn, M., & Nadeau, R. (1996). The magnification and minimization of social
    cleavages by the broadcast and narrowcast news media. International Journal of Public
    Opinion Research, 8, 374–390.
Mills, J. (1965). The effect of certainty on exposure to information prior to commitment.
    Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1, 348–355.
Mills, J., & Ross, A. (1964). Effects of commitment and certainty upon interest in supporting
    information. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 68, 552–555.

574                    Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


                                                                                                                14602466, 2010, 3, N. J. Stroud                                                     Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure

Mutz, D. C. (2002). The consequences of cross-cutting networks for political participation.
    American Journal of Political Science, 46, 838–855.
Mutz, D. C. (2006). How the mass media divide us. In P. S. Nivola & D. W. Brady (Eds.), Red
    and blue nation? Characteristics and causes of America’s polarized politics (Vol. 1,
    pp. 223–242). Stanford: Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace, and
    Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Nivola, P. S., & Brady, D. W. (2006). Red and blue nation? Characteristics and causes of
    America’s polarized politics (Vol. 1). Stanford: Hoover Institution on War, Revolution
    and Peace and Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Paletz, D. L., Koon, J., Whitehead, E., & Hagens, R. B. (1972). Selective exposure: The
    potential boomerang effect. Journal of Communication, 22, 48–53.
Prior, M. (2007). Post-broadcast democracy: How media choice increases inequality in political
    involvement and polarizes elections. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Project for Excellence in Journalism. (2004). The debate effect: How the press covered the
    pivotal period of the 2004 presidential campaign. Washington, DC.
Romer, D. (2004). Time series models. In D. Romer, K. Kenski, P. Waldman, C. Adasiewicz
    & K. H. Jamieson (Eds.), Capturing campaign dynamics: The National Annenberg Election
    Survey (pp. 117–189). New York: Oxford University Press.
Romer, D., Kenski, K., Winneg, K., Adasiewicz, C., & Jamieson, K. H. (2006). Capturing
    campaign dynamics: 2000 & 2004. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Schultz, C. B. (1974). The effect of confidence on selective exposure: An unresolved dilemma.
    The Journal of Social Psychology, 94, 65–69.
Schulz-Hardt, S., Frey, D., Lüthgens, C., & Moscovici, S. (2000). Biased information search in
    group decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 655–669.
Slater, M. D. (2004). Operationalizing and analyzing exposure: The foundation of media
    effects research. Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, 81, 168–183.
Slater, M. D. (2007). Reinforcing spirals: The mutual influence of media selectivity and
    media effects and their impact on individual behavior and social identity. Communication
    Theory, 17, 281–303.
Stroud, N. J. (2007). Media effects, selective exposure, and Fahrenheit 9/11. Political
    Communication, 24, 415–432.
Stroud, N. J. (2008). Media use and political predispositions: Revisiting the concept of
    selective exposure. Political Behavior, 30(3), 341–366.
Sunstein, C. (2001). Republic.com. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Taber, C. S., & Lodge, M. (2006). Motivated skepticism in the evaluation of political beliefs.
    American Journal of Political Science, 50, 755–769.
Thayer, S. (1969). Confidence and postjudgment exposure to consonant and dissonant
    information in a free-choice situation. Journal of Social Psychology, 77, 113–120.
Yanovitzky, I., & Cappella, J. N. (2001). Effect of call-in political talk radio shows on their
    audiences: Evidence from a multi-wave panel analysis. International Journal of Public
    Opinion Research, 13, 377–397.
Ziemke, D. A. (1980). Selective exposure in a presidential campaign contingent on certainty
    and salience. Communication yearbook (Vol. 4, pp. 497–511). New Brunswick, NJ:
    Transaction Books.

Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association               575


                                                                                                                   14602466, 2010, 3, Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure                                                       N. J. Stroud

Appendix: Variable descriptions
Demographics: Education (M = 14.29, SD = 2.47); age (M = 48.23, SD = 16.50);
income (M = 64.84 thousand dollars, SD = 49.96); gender (56% female);
race/ethnicity (8% Black/African-American, 8% Hispanic).
    Media use: (days in past week) National network news (M = 2.57, SD = 2.62),
24-hour cable news channel (M = 3.06, SD = 2.84), local television news (M = 3.96,
SD = 2.77), read a newspaper (M = 3.76, SD = 2.91), NPR (M = 1.17, SD = 2.21),
non-NPR talk radio (M = 1.29, SD = 2.18), use Internet for information about
presidential campaign (M = 1.00, SD = 2.02), Internet access (73%).
    Media attention: (Range = 0–3, higher values indicate more attention to stories
about the campaign for president), national network/cable television news (M =
1.60, SD = 1.09), local television news (M = 1.32, SD = 1.07), newspaper coverage
(M = 1.37, SD = 1.12).
    Political orientations: Political ideology (9% very conservative, 30% conservative, 39% moderate, 18% liberal, and 5% very liberal), Partisanship (20% strong
Republican; 23% not strong/lean Republican, 10% no leanings, 26% not strong/lean
Democrat, and 21% strong Democrat), Political interest (range = 1–4, higher values indicate more interest, M = 3.10, SD = 0.90, not included on survey 10/8-10),
political discussion in past week with friends/family (M = 3.22, SD = 2.53), general political knowledge (5 items, α = .64, M = 3.21, SD = 1.47, asked of 2/3 of
the sample between 7/16-8/8, 8/20-9/12,9/20-10/24), strength of political leanings
(range = 0–4, higher values are stronger leanings, M = 1.83, SD = 1.12).
    Political event exposure: (included as controls in relevant event panels) Debate
exposure (four items, α = .89; M = 10.53, SD = 4.37), Republican National Convention exposure (three items assessing exposure to various parts of the convention,
α = .86, range 0–9, M = 3.18, SD = 3.28), Democratic National Convention exposure (three items, α = .85, range 0–9, M = 3.02, SD = 3.25).


576                    Journal of Communication 60 (2010) 556–576 © 2010 International Communication Association


14602466, 2010, 3,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        触和政治对立的关系。横向结果强有力地表明党派选择性接触与政治对立有关。

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             纵向的分析表明党派选择性接触导致政治对立。一些证据也支持反向因果关系，
                                                                                                                        如今，人们可以轻松地选择媒体分享他们的政治倾向，这种行为被称作为

                                                                                                                                                           党派选择性接触。然而，进一步的研究对于更好地了解党派选择性接触的原因和


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   即政治对立导致党派选择性接触。本文对媒介效应研究以及正面和负面的标准化
                                                                                                                                                                                                 结果是有必要的。本研究基于全国安嫩伯格选举调查数据，探讨了党派选择性接
                                                                                             德克萨斯大学奥斯汀分校传播研究系
                                                     政治对立和党派选择性接触

                                                                     Natalie Jomini Stroud


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         影响的意义进行了讨论。
                                                                                                                【摘要：】


                                                                                                        14602466, 2010, 3, La polarisation et l'exposition sélective partisane

Natalie Jomini Stroud

De nos jours, les gens peuvent aisément sélectionner les médias qui partagent leurs
prédispositions politiques, un comportement connu sous le nom de l'exposition sélective
partisane. Des études additionnelles sont toutefois nécessaires pour mieux comprendre les causes
et les conséquences de l'exposition sélective partisane. Cette étude explore la relation entre
l'exposition sélective partisane et la polarisation politique à partir de données du National
Annenberg Election Survey. Les résultats en coupe transversale offrent des preuves solides à
l'effet que l'exposition sélective partisane est liée à la polarisation. Des analyses au fil du temps
documentent le fait que l'exposition sélective partisane mène à la polarisation. Certaines preuves
soutiennent la direction causale inverse, à savoir que la polarisation mène à l'exposition sélective
partisane. Les implications pour l'étude des effets médiatiques et les conséquences normatives
(tant positives que négatives) sont discutées.

Mots clés : exposition sélective, polarisation, effets médiatiques, communication politique


                                                                                            14602466, 2010, 3, Polarisierung und voreingenommene selektive Wahrnehmung


Natalie Jomini Stroud

Heutzutage können Menschen ohne Probleme Medienangebote auswählen, die ihre
politischen Prädispositionen widerspiegeln - ein Verhalten, welches als voreingenommene
selektive Wahrnehmung bezeichnet wird. Wir benötigen allerdings intensivere Forschung, um
die Gründe und Konsequenzen dieser voreingenommenen selektiven Wahrnehmung besser zu
verstehen. Die Studie untersucht die Beziehung zwischen voreingenommener selektiver
Wahrnehmung und politischer Polarisierung mittels Daten der Nationalen Annenberg
Wahlbefragung. Querschnittsanalysen geben deutliche Hinweise darauf, dass
voreingenommene selektive Wahrnehmung in Zusammenhang mit Polarisierung steht.
Analysen im Zeitverlauf dokumentieren, dass voreingenommene selektive Wahrnehmung zu
Polarisierung führt. Einige Hinweise stützen auch die umgekehrte Kausalrichtung, nämlich
dass Polarisierung zu voreingenommener selektiver Wahrnehmung führt. Implikationen für
die Untersuchung von Medienwirkungen und normative Implikationen – positiv als auch
negativ – werden diskutiert.

Schlüsselbegriffe: selektive Wahrnehmung, Polarisierung, Medienwirkungen, politische
Kommunikation


                                                                            14602466, 2010, 3,           Defining Media Enjoyment as the Satisfaction of Intrinsic Needs


                           양극화와 분파적 선택노출


                           Natalie Jomini Stroud, Ph.D.


                                          요약


오늘날, 사람들은 그들의 정치적 선호도를 굥유하기위한 미디어 매체를 쉽게 선택할 수


있다. 그러나 정파적 선택 노출에 대한 인과관계를 이해하기 위해서는 추가적인 연구가


필요하다. 본 연구는 정파적 선택 노출과 정치적 양극화를 National Annenberg Election


조사로부터의 데이터를 사용해 조사하였다. 결과들은 정파적 선택 노출은 양극화와


관계되어 있다는 것에 대한 높은 정도의 증거를 보여주었다. 여러번에 걸친 자료들은


정파적 선택노출이 양극화를 이끈다는 것을 보여주고 있다. 여러 중거들은 그 반대적


인과관계를 지지하고 있는데, 즉 양극화가 정파적 선택 노출을 이끈다는 것이다. 미디어


효과들과 규범적 적용들에 대한 연구를 위한 함의들이—긍적적이며 부정적인 측면의—


논의 되었다.