The Journal of Political Philosophy: Volume 10, Number 2, 2002, pp. 175±195


                  The Law of Group Polarization*
                                 CASS R. SUNSTEIN
                     Law and Political Science, University of Chicago


C
.
      ONSIDER the following events:

    Af®rmative action is under attack in the state of Texas. A number of
    professors at a particular branch of the University of Texas are inclined to be
    supportive of af®rmative action; they meet to exchange views and to plan
    further action, if necessary. What are these professors likely to think, and to
    do, after they talk?
.   After a nationally publicized shooting at a high school, a group of people in the
    community, most of them tentatively in favor of greater gun control, come
    together to discuss the possibility of imposing new gun control measures.
    What, if anything, will happen to individual views as a result of this discussion?
.   A jury is deciding on an appropriate punitive damage award in a case of
    recklessly negligent behavior by a large company; the behavior resulted in a
    serious injury to a small child. Before deliberating as a group, individual
    jurors have chosen appropriate awards, leading to an average of $1.5 million
    and a median of $1 million. As a statistical generalization, how will the jury's
    ultimate award tend to compare to these ®gures?
.   A group of women are concerned about what they consider to be a mounting
    ``tyranny of feminism.'' They believe that women should be able to make
    their own choices, but they also think that men and women are fundamentally
    different, and that their differences legitimately lead to different social roles.
    The group decides to meet every two weeks to focus on common concerns.
    After a year, is it possible to say what its members are likely to think?
   Every society contains innumerable deliberating groups. Church groups,
political parties, women's organizations, juries, dissident organizations, legislative
bodies, regulatory commissions, multimember courts, faculties, student organizations, those participating in talk radio programs, Internet discussion groups, and
others engage in deliberation. It is a simple social fact that sometimes people
enter discussions with one view and leave with another, even on political and
moral questions. Emphasizing this fact, many recent observers have embraced the

   *This article grows out of an earlier essay written for a legal audience, Cass R. Sunstein,
``Deliberative trouble? Why groups go to extremes,'' Yale Law Journal, 110 (2000), 71±119. I am
especially grateful to James Fishkin for valuable comments on a previous draft.

# Cass R. Sunstein, 2002.


                                                                                                            14679760, 2002, 2, 176                                      CASS R. SUNSTEIN


traditional American aspiration to ``deliberative democracy,'' an ideal that is
designed to combine popular responsiveness with a high degree of re¯ection and
exchange among people with competing views.1 But for the most part, the
resulting literature has not been empirically informed. It has not dealt much with
the real-world consequences of deliberation, and with whether generalizations
hold in actual deliberative settings, with groups of different predispositions and
compositions.
   My principal purpose is to investigate a striking but largely neglected statistical
regularityÐthat of group polarizationÐand to relate this phenomenon to
underlying questions about the role of deliberation in the ``public sphere'' of a
heterogeneous democracy. In brief, group polarization means that members of a
deliberating group predictably move toward a more extreme point in the
direction indicated by the members' predeliberation tendencies.2 Thus, for
example, members of the ®rst deliberating group are likely to become more ®rmly
committed to af®rmative action; the second group will probably end up favoring
gun control quite enthusiastically; the punitive damages jury will likely come up
with an award higher than the median, perhaps higher than the mean as well, and
very possibly as high as or higher than that of the highest predeliberation award
of any individual member; the group of women concerned about feminism is
likely to become very conservative indeed on gender issues. Notably, groups
consisting of individuals with extremist tendencies are more likely to shift, and
likely to shift more (a point that bears on the wellsprings of violence and
terrorism); the same is true for groups with some kind of salient shared identity
(like Republicans, Democrats, and lawyers, but unlike jurors and experimental
subjects). When like-minded people are participating in ``iterated polarization
games''Ðwhen they meet regularly, without sustained exposure to competing
viewsÐextreme movements are all the more likely.
   Two principal mechanisms underlie group polarization. The ®rst points to social
in¯uences on behavior and in particular to people's desire to maintain their
reputation and their self-conception. The second emphasizes the limited
``argument pools'' within any group, and the directions in which those limited
      See Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1996), pp. 128±64; Jon Elster, ed., Deliberative Democracy (London:
Cambridge University Press, 1998); JuÈrgen Habermas, Between Facts and Norms, trans. William
Rehg (Oxford: Polity, 1996), pp. 274±328; Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitution (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993), pp. 133±45.
      Note that this statement has two different implications. First, a deliberating group, asked to make
a group decision, will shift toward a more extreme point in the direction indicated by the median
predeliberation judgment. Second, the tendency of individuals who compose a deliberating group, if
polled anonymously after discussion, will be to shift toward a more extreme point in the direction
indicated by the median predeliberation judgment. Frequently these two phenomena are collapsed in
the empirical literature, and I will not always distinguish between them here. But for some purposes it
is important to distinguish them, and hence some work refers to the movement of groups as ``choice
shifts'' and the movement of individuals as ``group polarization.'' See Joahnnes A. Zuber et al.,
``Choice shift and group polarization: an analysis of the status of arguments and social decision
schemes,'' Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62 (1992), 50±61 at pp. 50, 59.


                                                                                                14679760, 2002, 2,                           THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                                  177


pools lead group members. An understanding of the two mechanisms provides
many insights into deliberating bodies. Such an understanding illuminates a great
deal, for example, about likely processes within multimember courts, juries,
political parties, and legislaturesÐnot to mention ethnic groups, extremist
organizations, terrorists, criminal conspiracies, student associations, faculties,
institutions engaged in feuds or ``turf battles,'' workplaces, and families. At the
same time, these mechanisms raise serious questions about deliberation from the
normative point of view. If deliberation predictably pushes groups toward a more
extreme point in the direction of their original tendency, whatever it may be, do we
have any reason to think that deliberation is producing improvements? A sensible
answer would emphasize the importance of paying far more attention to the
circumstances and nature of deliberation, not merely to the fact that it is occurring.
   One of my largest purposes is to cast light on enclave deliberation, a process
that I understand to involve deliberation among like-minded people who talk or
even live, much of the time, in isolated enclaves. I will urge that enclave
deliberation is, simultaneously, a potential danger to social stability, a source of
social fragmentation or even violence, and a safeguard against social injustice and
unreasonableness. As we will see, group polarization helps to cast new light on the
old idea that social homogeneity can be quite damaging to good deliberation.
When people are hearing echoes of their own voices, the consequence may be far
more than support and reinforcement. But there is a point more supportive of
enclave deliberation: participants in heterogeneous groups tend to give least weight
to the views of low-status members3Ðin some times and places, women, AfricanAmericans, less-educated people. Hence enclave deliberation might be the only
way to ensure that those views are developed and eventually heard. Without a
place for enclave deliberation, citizens in the broader public sphere may move in
certain directions, even extreme directions, precisely because opposing voices are
not heard at all. An ambivalent lesson is that deliberating enclaves can be breeding
grounds for both the development of unjustly suppressed views and for unjusti®ed
extremism, indeed fanaticism. A less ambivalent lesson involves the need, not to
celebrate or to challenge deliberation as such, but to design institutions so as to
ensure that when individuals and groups move, it is because of the force of the
arguments, not because of the social dynamics that I will emphasize here.


                     I. HOW AND WHY GROUPS POLARIZE

A. THE BASIC PHENOMENON
Group polarization is among the most robust patterns found in deliberating
bodies, and it has been found all over the world and in many diverse tasks.
    Caryn Christenson and Ann Abbott, ``Team medical decision making,'' Decision Making in
Health Care, ed. Gretchen Chapman and Frank Sonnenberg (New York: Cambridge University Press,
2000), pp. 267, 273±6.


                                                                                                        14679760, 2002, 2, 178                                    CASS R. SUNSTEIN


The result is that groups often make more extreme decisions than would the
typical or average individual in the group (where ``extreme'' is de®ned solely
internally, by reference to the group's initial dispositions). Note that in the
experimental work, both extremism and tendencies are measured not by
reference to anything external, or to a normative standard, but by reference to
the particular scale that is brought before the individuals who compose the
group. Thus, for example, people might be asked, on a scale of 75 to 5, how
strongly they agree or disagree with a particular statement (white racism is
responsible for the disadvantages faced by African±Americans, the government
should increase regulation of nuclear power, America should increase foreign
aid). We shall see that the experimental literature is closely connected to realworld phenomena.
   Though standard, the term ``group polarization'' is somewhat misleading. It is
not meant to suggest that group members will shift to the poles, nor does it refer
to an increase in variance among groups, though this may be the ultimate result.
Instead the term refers to a predictable shift within a group discussing a case or
problem. As the shift occurs, groups, and group members, move and coalesce,
not toward the middle of antecedent dispositions, but toward a more extreme
position in the direction indicated by those dispositions. The effect of
deliberation is both to decrease variance among group members, as individual
differences diminish, and also to produce convergence on a relatively more
extreme point among predeliberation judgments.
   Consider some examples of the basic phenomenon, which has been found in
over a dozen nations.4 (a) A group of moderately profeminist women will become
more strongly profeminist after discussion.5 (b) After discussion, citizens of
France become more critical of the United States and its intentions with respect to
economic aid.6 (c) After discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice
offer more negative responses to the question whether white racism is responsible
for conditions faced by African±Americans in American cities.7 (d) After
discussion, whites predisposed not to show racial prejudice offer more positive
responses to the same question.8 As statistical regularities, it should follow, for
example, that that those moderately critical of an ongoing war effort will, after
discussion, sharply oppose the war; that those who believe that global warming is
     R. Brown, Social Psychology, 2nd edn (New York: Free Press, 1985), p. 222. These include the
United States, Canada, New Zealand, Germany, and France. See, e.g., Johannes A. Zuber et al.,
``Choice shift and group polarization,'' Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62 (1992), 50±
61 on Germany; Dominic Abrams et al., ``Knowing what to think by knowing who you are,'' British
Journal of Social Psychology, 29 (1990), 97±119 at p. 112 on New Zealand. Of course it is possible
that some cultures would show a greater or lesser tendency toward polarization; this would be an
extremely interesting area for empirical study.
     See D. G. Myers, ``Discussion-induced attitude polarization,'' Human Relations, 28 (1975), 699.
     R. Brown, Social Psychology, 2nd edn (New York: Free Press, 1985), p. 224.
     D. G. Myers and G. D. Bishop, ``Enhancement of dominant attitudes in group discussion,''
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 20 (1971), 386±91.
     See ibid.


                                                                                        14679760, 2002, 2,                         THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                            179


a serious problem are likely, after discussion, to hold that belief with considerable
con®dence; that people tending to believe in the inferiority of a certain racial
group will become more entrenched in this belief as a result of discussion; that
those tending to condemn the United States will, as a result of discussion, end up
condemning the United States with some intensity.
   There have been two main explanations for group polarization, both of which
have been extensively investigated.
   1. Social comparison. The ®rst, involving social comparison, begins with the
claim that people want to be perceived favorably by other group members, and
also to perceive themselves favorably. Once they hear what others believe, they
adjust their positions in the direction of the dominant position. The result is to
press the group's position toward one or another extreme, and also to induce
shifts in individual members. People may wish, for example, not to seem too
enthusiastic or too restrained in their enthusiasm for af®rmative action,
feminism, or an increase in national defense; hence their views may shift when
they see what other group members think. The result will be group
polarization.
   The dynamic behind the social comparison explanation is that most people
may want to take a position of a certain socially preferred sortÐin the case of
risk-taking, for example, they may want to be perceived (and to perceive
themselves) as moderate risk-takers, and their choice of position is partly a
product of this desire. No one can know what such a position would be until the
positions of others are revealed. Thus individuals move their judgments in order
to preserve their image to others and their image to themselves.
   2. Persuasive arguments. The second explanation, emphasizing the role of
persuasive arguments, is based on a common sense intuition: that any
individual's position on an issue is partly a function of which arguments
presented within the group seem convincing. The choice therefore moves in the
direction of the most persuasive position defended by the group, taken as a
collectivity. Because a group whose members are already inclined in a certain
direction will have a disproportionate number of arguments supporting that
same direction, the result of discussion will be to move individuals further in
the direction of their initial inclinations. The key is the existence of a limited
argument pool, one that is skewed (speaking purely descriptively) in a
particular direction. Members of a group will have thought of some, but not
all, of the arguments that justify their initial inclination; consider the question
whether to fear global warming or not to do so. In discussion, arguments of a
large number of individuals are stated and heard, but the total argument pool
will be tilted in one or another direction, depending on the predispositions of
the people who compose the group. Hence there will be a shift in the direction
of the original tilt.
   There is a related possibility, not quite reducible to either of the two standard
arguments, but using elements of each. In their individual judgments, people are


                                                                                                      14679760, 2002, 2, 180                                    CASS R. SUNSTEIN


averse to extremes; they tend to seek the middle of the relevant poles.9 It is
possible that when people are making judgments individually, they err on the side
of caution, expressing a view in the direction that they really hold, but stating
that view cautiously, for fear of seeming extreme. Once other people express
supportive views, the relevant inhibition disappears, and people feel free to say
what, in a sense, they really believe. There appears to be no direct test of this
hypothesis, but it is reasonable to believe that the phenomenon plays a role in
group polarization and choice shifts.


B. REFINEMENTSÐAND DEPOLARIZATION
I now turn to some re®nements, complicating the basic account of group
polarization. For purposes of understanding the relationship between that
phenomenon and democracy, the central points are twofold. First, it matters
a great deal whether people consider themselves part of the same social
group as the other members; a sense of shared identity will heighten the shift,
and a belief that identity is not shared will reduce and possibly eliminate it.
Second, deliberating groups will tend to depolarize if they consist of equally
opposed subgroups and if members have a degree of ¯exibility in their
positions. Both of these ®ndings have great relevance to any account of the
relationship between group polarization and democratic institutions, as we
will see.
   1. Statistical regularities. Of course not all groups polarize; some groups end
up in the middle, not toward either extreme. Nor is it hard to understand why
this might be so. If the people defending the original tendency are particularly
unpersuasive, group polarization is unlikely to occur. If the outliers are especially
convincing, groups may even shift away from their original tendency and in the
direction held by few or even one.
   Sometimes, moreover, external constraints or an external ``shock'' may
prevent or blunt group polarization. Group members with well-de®ned views on
a certain issue (gun control, separation of church and state, intervention in
foreign nations) may be prone to polarize, but in order to maintain political
effectiveness, even basic credibility, they will sometimes maintain a relatively
moderate face, publicly or even privately. Groups that have started to polarize in
an extreme direction may move toward the middle in order to promote their own
legitimacy or because of new revelations of one kind of another. Readers are
likely to be able to identify their own preferred examples.
   2. Affective factors, identity, and solidarity. Affective factors are quite
important in group decisions, and when manipulated, such factors will
signi®cantly increase or decrease polarization. If group members are linked by
     See, e.g., Mark Kelman et al., ``Context dependence in legal decision making,'' Behavioral Law
and Economics, ed. Cass R. Sunstein (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), pp. 61, 71±6.


                                                                                                        14679760, 2002, 2,                             THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                                        181


affective ties, dissent is signi®cantly less frequent.10 The existence of affective
ties thus reduces the number of divergent arguments and also intensi®es social
in¯uences on choice. Hence people are less likely to shift if the direction
advocated is being pushed by unfriendly group members; the likelihood of a
shift, and its likely size, are increased when people perceive fellow members as
friendly, likeable, and similar to them.11 In the same vein, physical spacing
tends to reduce polarization; a sense of common fate and intragroup similarity
tend to increase it, as does the introduction of a rival ``outgroup.''
   In a re®nement of particular importance to social deliberation and the
theory of democracy, it has been found to matter whether people think of
themselves, antecedently or otherwise, as part of a group having a degree of
solidarity. If they think of themselves in this way, group polarization is all the
more likely, and it is likely too to be more extreme.12 Thus when the context
emphasizes each person's membership in the social group engaging in
deliberation, polarization increases. This ®nding is in line with more general
evidence that social ties among deliberating group members tend to suppress
dissent and in that way to lead to inferior decisions.13 This should not be
surprising. If ordinary ®ndings of group polarization are a product of social
in¯uences and limited argument pools, it stands to reason that when group
members think of one another as similar along a salient dimension, or if some
external factor (politics, geography, race, sex) unites them, group polarization
will be heightened.
   3. Depolarization and deliberation without shifts. Is it possible to construct
either groups that will depolarizeÐthat will tend toward the middleÐor
groups whose members will not shift at all? Both phenomena seem to be real
in actual deliberating bodies. In fact the persuasive arguments theory implies
that there will be depolarization if and when new persuasive arguments are
offered that are opposite to the direction initially favored by group members.
There is evidence for this phenomenon.14 Depolarization, rather than
polarization, will also be found when the relevant group consists of
      See Brooke Harrington, ``The pervasive effects of embeddedness in organizations,'' p. 24
(unpublished manuscript 2000).
      See Hermann Brandstatter, ``Social emotions in discussion groups,'' Dynamics of Group
Decisions, ed. Hermann Brandstatter et al. (Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1978).
      See Russell Spears, Martin Lee, and Stephen Lee, ``De-individuation and group polarization in
computer-mediated communication,'' British Journal of Social Psychology, 29 (1990), 121±34;
Dominic Abrams et al., ``Knowing what to think by knowing who you are,'' British Journal of Social
Psychology, 29 (1990), 97±119 at p. 112; Patricia Wallace, The Psychology of the Internet
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Presss, 1999), pp. 73±6.
      See Lee Roy Beach, The Psychology of Decision Making in Organizations (Thousand Oaks,
Calif.: Sage Publications, 1997); Harrington, ``The pervasive effects of embeddedness in
organizations.''
      A similar possibility is that hearing other similar opinions produces greater con®dence in
individual positions, opening members to a more extreme judgment in the same direction. This has
been raised recently by Chip Heath and Richard Gonzales, ``Interaction with others increases decision
con®dence but not decision quality: evidence against information collection views of interactive
decision making,'' Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 61 (1997), 305±26.


                                                                                                  14679760, 2002, 2, 182                                  CASS R. SUNSTEIN


individuals drawn equally from two extremes.15 And ``familiar and longdebated issues do not depolarize easily.''16 With respect to such issues, people
are simply less likely to shift at all. And when one or more people in a group
know the right answer to a factual question, the group is likely to shift in the
direction of accuracy.


C. ACTUAL DELIBERATION WITHIN IDENTIFIABLE GROUPS: ITERATED
``POLARIZATION GAMES''
Studies of group polarization involve one-shot experiments. We will turn shortly
to group polarization in the real world. But let us notice an intriguing implication
of the experiments, an implication with special importance for democratic
deliberation involving people who meet with each other not once, but on a
regular basis.
   If participants engage in repeated discussionsÐif, for example, they meet each
month, express views, and take votesÐthere should be repeated shifts toward,
and past, the de®ned pole. Thus, for example, if a group of citizens is thinking
about genetic engineering of food, or the minimum wage, or the World Trade
Organization, the consequence of their discussions, over time, should be to lead
in quite extreme directions. In these iterated ``polarization games,'' deliberation
over time should produce a situation in which individuals hold positions more
extreme than those of any individual member before the series of deliberations
began. In fact the idea of iterated polarization games seems far more realistic
than the processes studied in one-shot experiments.There appears to be no study
of such iterated polarization games. But it is not dif®cult to think of real-world
groups in which the consequence of deliberation, over time, appears to be to shift
both groups and individuals to positions that early on they could not possibly
have accepted.


D. RHETORICAL ASYMMETRY                AND THE       ``SEVERITY SHIFT'': A PERVASIVE
PHENOMENON?

In a noteworthy quali®cation of the general literature on group polarization, the
previously mentioned study of punitive damage awards by juries found a striking
pattern for dollar awards.17 For any dollar award above zero, the general effect
of deliberation was to increase awards above those of the median voter. This was
a kind of ``severity shift.'' Dollar awards did not simply polarize; while higher
      See H. Burnstein, ``Persuasion as argument processing,'' Group Decision Making, ed. H.
Brandstatter, J. H. Davis and G. Stocker-Kreichgauer (London: Academic Press, 1982).
      Roger Brown, Social Psychology, 2nd edn (New York: Free Press, 1985), p. 226.
      See David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, ``Deliberating about dollars,''
Columbia Law Review, 100 (2000), 1139±75.


                                                                                      14679760, 2002, 2,                        THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                           183


awards increased dramatically, as compared to the median of predeliberation
votes, low awards increased as well. Why is this?
   Both the original experiment and a follow-up experiment suggest that the
severity shift is a product of a ``rhetorical asymmetry'' that favors, other things
being equal and in any contest, the person or persons urging higher awards. In
our culture, and in light of existing social norms, the person favoring the higher
amount for punitive damages appears likely to be more convincing than the
person favoring the lower amount. It is important to emphasize that this
asymmetry operates independently of any facts about the individual case. The
reason appears to be that with respect to dollar awards involving a corporate
defendant, stronger argumentsÐ``we need to deter this kind of conduct,'' ``we
need to send a powerful signal,'' ``we need to attract their attention''Ðtend to
have comparatively greater weight.
   Undoubtedly there are many other contexts containing rhetorical asymmetry,
and undoubtedly the asymmetry can affect outcomes in democratic institutions,
as it did in the jury study. Legislative judgments about criminal punishment may,
for example, involve an asymmetry of exactly this kind; those favoring greater
punishment for drug-related offenses appear to be at a systematic advantage over
those favoring lesser punishment. In certain settings, those favoring lower taxes,
or more aid for scholarship students, or greater funding for environmental
protection, may have a similar rhetorical advantage. Much remains to be
explored here. For present purposes the point is that when there is an initial
distribution of views in a certain direction, and when existing norms give a more
extreme movement in that direction a rhetorical advantage, quite extreme shifts
can be expected.


                  II. POLARIZATION AND DEMOCRACY
In this section I discuss evidence of group polarization in legal and political
institutions, and I trace some implications of that evidence for participants in a
deliberative democracy. I will deal with normative issues below; my purpose here
is to cast a new light on social practices.


A. POLARIZING EVENTS AND POLARIZATION ENTREPRENEURS

Group polarization has a large effect on many deliberating groups and
institutions; its effects are hardly limited to the laboratory. Consider, for
example, the political and social role of religious organizations. Such
organizations tend to strengthen group members' religious convictions, simply
by virtue of the fact that like-minded people are talking to one another. Religious
groups amplify the religious impulse, especially if group members are insulated
from other groups, and on occasion, the result can be to lead people in quite
bizarre directions. Whether or not this is so, political activity by members of


                                                                                                 14679760, 2002, 2, 184                                  CASS R. SUNSTEIN


religious organizations is undoubtedly affected by cascade-like effects and by
group polarization. In a related vein, survey evidence shows that dramatic social
events, like the assassination of Martin Luther King and civil rights disturbances,
tend to polarize attitudes, with both positive and negative attitudes increasing
within demographic groups.18 The point emphatically holds for the terrorist
attacks in New York City and Washington DC on September 11, 2001.
   In fact it is possible to imagine ``professional polarizers,'' or ``polarization
entrepreneurs,'' that is, political activists who have, as one of their goals, the
creation of spheres in which like-minded people can hear a particular point of
view from one or more articulate people, and also participate, actually or
vicariously, in a deliberative discussion in which a certain point of view becomes
entrenched and strengthened. For those seeking to promote social reform, an
extremely promising strategy is to begin by promoting discussions among people
who tend to favor the relevant reform; such discussions are likely to intensify the
underlying convictions and concerns. Social reformers of all stripes may qualify
as polarization entrepreneurs; the category includes those ®ghting communism in
Eastern Europe and apartheid in South Africa, as well as terrorist leaders and
those involved in criminal conspiracies of many kinds.


B. ``OUTGROUPS''
Group polarization has particular implications for insulated ``outgroups'' and (in
the extreme case) for the treatment of conspiracies. Recall that polarization
increases when group members identify themselves along some salient dimension,
and especially when the group is able to de®ne itself by contrast to another group.
Outgroups are in this positionÐof self-contrast to othersÐby de®nition.
Excluded by choice or coercion from discussion with others, such groups may
become polarized in quite extreme directions, often in part because of group
polarization. It is for this reason that outgroup members can sometimes be led, or
lead themselves, to violent acts.
   The tendency toward polarization among outgroups helps explain special
concern about ``hate speech,'' where group antagonisms can be heightened, and it
simultaneously raises some questions about the idea that certain group
discussions produce ``consciousness raising.'' It is possible, at least, that the
consequence of discussion is not only or mostly to raise consciousness (an
ambiguous idea to be sure), but to produce group polarization in one direction or
anotherÐand at the same time to increase con®dence in the position that has
newly emerged. This does not mean that consciousness is never raised;
undoubtedly group discussion can identify and clarify problems that were
previously repressed, or understood as an individual rather than social product.
      See R. T. Riley and T. F. Pettigrew, ``Dramatic events and attitude change,'' Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 34 (1976), 1004±15.


                                                                                                       14679760, 2002, 2,                             THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                                       185


But nothing of this sort is established by the mere fact that views have changed
and coalesced, and are held, post-discussion, with a high degree of con®dence.


C. FEUDS, ETHNIC AND INTERNATIONAL STRIFE, AND WAR
Group polarization is inevitably at work in feuds, ethnic and international strife,
and war. One of the characteristic features of feuds is that members of feuding
groups tend to talk only to one another, fueling and amplifying their outrage, and
solidifying their impression of the relevant events. Informational and reputational
forces are very much at work here, producing cascade effects, and group
polarization can lead members to increasingly extreme positions. It is not too
much of a leap to suggest that these effects are sometimes present within ethnic
groups and even nations, notwithstanding the usually high degree of national
heterogeneity. In America, sharp divergences between whites and African±
Americans, on particular salient events or more generally, can be explained by
reference to group polarization. The same is true for sharp divergences of
viewpoints within and across nations. Group polarization occurs within Israel
and among the Palestinian Authority; it occurs within the United States and
among those inclined to support, or at least not to condemn, terrorist acts. A
large part of the perennial question, ``Why do they hate us?'' lies not in ancient
grievances or individual consciences but in the social in¯uences emphasized here.
Of course the media play a large role, as we shall now see.


D. THE INTERNET, COMMUNICATIONS POLICY, AND MASS DELIBERATION
Many people have expressed concern about processes of social in¯uence on the
mass media and the Internet. The general problem is said to be one of
fragmentation, with certain people hearing more and louder versions of their own
pre-existing commitments, thus reducing the bene®ts that come from exposure to
competing views and unnoticed problems. With greater specialization, people are
increasingly able to avoid general interest newspapers and magazines, and to
make choices that re¯ect their own predispositions. The Internet is making it
possible for people to design their own highly individuated communications
packages, ®ltering out troublesome issues and disfavored voices. Long before the
Internet, it was possible to discuss the ``racial strati®cation of the public sphere,''
by reference to divergences between white and African±American newspapers.19
New communications technologies may increase this phenomenon.
   An understanding of group polarization explains why a fragmented
communications market may create problems.20 A ``plausible hypothesis is that
the Internet-like setting is most likely to create a strong tendency toward group
      Ronald N. Jacobs, Race, Media, and the Crisis of Civil Society (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2000).
      See Cass R. Sunstein, Republic.com (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2001).


                                                                                        14679760, 2002, 2, 186                                      CASS R. SUNSTEIN


polarization when the members of the group feel some sense of group identity.''21
If certain people are deliberating with many like-minded others, views will not be
reinforced but instead shifted to more extreme points. This cannot be said to be
bad by itselfÐperhaps the increased extremism is goodÐbut it is certainly
troublesome if diverse social groups are led, through predictable mechanisms,
toward increasingly opposing and ever more extreme views.


                               III. DELIBERATIVE TROUBLE
I now turn to normative issues, involving the relationship among group
polarization, democratic theory, and legal institutions. I focus in particular on
the implications of group polarization for institutional design, with special
reference to the uses of heterogeneity and the complex issues presented by
deliberation inside particular ``enclaves.'' Should enclave deliberation count as
deliberation at all? If deliberation requires a measure of disagreement, this is a
serious question. But even like-minded people will have different perspectives and
views, so that a group of people who tend to like af®rmative action, or to fear
global warming, will produce some kind of exchange of opinion. I will urge that
in spite of this point, enclave deliberation raises serious dif®culties for the
participants and possibly for society as a whole. But there are many complexities
here. In some cases, enclave deliberation will be a defective form for the
participants, but will serve to foster a diversity of views for the wider public, and
will therefore be desirable from the social point of view.
   The central problem is that widespread error and social fragmentation are
likely to result when like-minded people, insulated from others, move in extreme
directions simply because of limited argument pools and parochial in¯uences. As
an extreme example, consider a system of one-party domination, which sti¯es
dissent in part because it refuses to establish space for the emergence of divergent
positions; in this way, it intensi®es polarization within the party while also
disabling external criticism. In terms of institutional design, the most natural
response is to ensure that members of deliberating groups, whether small or
large, will not isolate themselves from competing viewsÐa point with
implications for multimember courts, open primaries, freedom of association,
and the architecture of the Internet. Here, then, is a plea for ensuring that
deliberation occurs within a large and heterogeneous public sphere, and for
guarding against a situation in which like-minded people are walling themselves
off from alternative perspectives.
   But there is a dif®culty with this response: A certain measure of isolation will,
in some cases, be crucial to the development of ideas and approaches that would
not otherwise emerge and that deserve a social hearing. Members of low-status
groups are often quiet within heterogeneous bodies, and thus deliberation, in
       See Patricia Wallace, The Psychology of the Internet, pp. 73±84.


                                                                                                      14679760, 2002, 2,                             THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                                      187


such bodies, tends to be dominated by high-status members. Any shiftÐin
technology, norms, or legal practiceÐthat increases the number of deliberating
enclaves will increase the diversity of society's aggregate ``argument pool'' while
also increasing the danger of extremism and instability, ultimately even violence.
Terrorism itself is a product, in part, of group polarization. Shifts toward a
general ``public sphere,'' without much in the way of enclave deliberation, will
decrease the likelihood of extremism and instability, but at the same time
produce what may be a sti¯ing uniformity. And shifts toward more in the way of
enclave deliberation will increase society's aggregate ``argument pool,'' and
hence enrich the marketplace of ideas, while also increasing extremism,
fragmentation, hostility, and even violence.
   No algorithm is available to solve the resulting conundrums. But some general
lessons do emerge. It is important to ensure social spaces for deliberation by likeminded persons, but it is equally important to ensure that members of the relevant
groups are not isolated from conversation with people having quite different views.
The goal of that conversation is to promote the interests of those inside and outside
the relevant enclaves, by subjecting group members to competing positions, by
allowing them to exchange views with others and to see things from their point of
view, and by ensuring that the wider society does not marginalize, and thus
insulate itself from, views that may turn out to be right, or at least informative.


A. DOUBTS AND QUESTIONS


1. Why Deliberate?
If the effect of deliberation is to move people toward a more extreme point in the
direction of their original tendency, why is it anything to celebrate? The
underlying mechanisms do not provide much reason for con®dence. If people are
shifting their position in order to maintain their reputation and self-conception,
before groups that may or may not be representative of the public as a whole, is
there any reason to think that deliberation is making things better rather than
worse? To the extent that shifts are occurring as a result of partial and frequently
skewed argument pools, the results of deliberative judgments may be far worse
than the results of simply taking the median of predeliberation judgments.
    The most important point here is that those who emphasize the ideals
associated with deliberative democracy tend to emphasize its preconditions,
which include political equality, an absence of strategic behavior, full
information, and the goal of ``reaching understanding.''22 In real-world
      See JuÈrgen Habermas, A Theory of Communicative Action, trans. Thomas McCarthy (Boston:
Beacon Press, 1984), p. 99. Thus Habermas distinguishes between strategic and communicative action
and stresses ``the cooperatively pursued goal of reaching understanding''; compare the treatment in
Gutmann and Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement, pp. 52±94, emphasizing the idea of
reciprocity, which emphasizes the desire to justify one's position by reference to reasons.


                                                                                         14679760, 2002, 2, 188                               CASS R. SUNSTEIN


deliberations, behavior is often strategic, and equality is often absent in one or
another form. But the existence of a limited argument pool, strengthening the
existing tendency within the group, will operate in favor of group polarization
even if no individual behaves strategically. By itself this will produce group
polarization whether or not social in¯uence is operating. On the other hand, the
social context of deliberation can make a large difference, and under certain
conditions, group polarization need not occur. The nature of the deliberative
process, and the characteristics of the deliberating participants, can matter a
great deal. I will return to this issue below.
   In any case social in¯uences need not be inconsistent with the effort to produce
truth and understanding; when people attempt to position themselves in a way
that ®ts with their best self-conception, or their preferred self-presentation,
nothing has gone wrong, even from the standpoint of deliberation's most
enthusiastic defenders. Perhaps group polarization could be reduced or even
eliminated if we emphasized that good deliberation has full information as a
precondition; by hypothesis, argument pools would not be limited if all
information were available. But that requirement is extremely stringent, and if
there is already full information, the role of deliberation is greatly reduced. In any
case the group polarization phenomenon suggests that in real-world situations,
deliberation is hardly guaranteed to increase the likelihood of arriving at truth.
The trick is to produce an institutional design that will increase the likelihood
that deliberation will lead in sensible directions, so that any polarization, if it
occurs, will be a result of learning, rather than group dynamics.

2. Movements Right and Wrong
Of course we cannot say, from the mere fact of polarization, that there has been a
movement in the wrong direction. Perhaps the more extreme tendency is better;
recall that group polarization is likely to have fueled the antislavery movement
and many others that deserve to meet with widespread approval. In the context
of punitive damage awards, perhaps a severity shift produces good outcomes.
Extremism should hardly be a word of opprobrium; everything depends on what
extremists are arguing for. In addition, group polarization can be explained
partly by reference to the fact that people who are con®dent are likely to be
persuasive; and it is sensible to say that as a statistical matter, though not an
invariable truth, people who are con®dent are more likely to be right. But when
group discussion tends to lead people to more strongly held versions of the same
view with which they began, and when social in¯uences and limited argument
pools are responsible, there is little reason for great con®dence in the effects of
deliberation.
   We can go further. If it is possible to identify a particular viewpoint as
unreasonable, it is also possible to worry about group discussion among people
who share that viewpoint. If the underlying views are unreasonable, it makes
sense to fear that these discussions may fuel increasing hatred and extremism


                                                                                       14679760, 2002, 2,                         THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                           189


(used here in an evaluative sense). This does not mean that the discussions can or
should be regulated in a system dedicated to freedom of speech. But it does raise
questions about the idea that ``more speech'' is necessarily an adequate remedy.


B. THE VIRTUES OF HETEROGENEITY

The simplest lesson here involves both individual susceptibility and institutional
design. For many people, mere awareness of the role of limited argument pools
and social in¯uences might provide some inoculation against inadequately
justi®ed movements of opinion within groups. More important, institutions
might well be designed to ensure that when shifts are occurring, it is not because
of arbitrary or illegitimate constraints on the available range of arguments. This
is a central task of constitutional design, and in this light a system of checks and
balances might be defended, not as an undemocratic check on the will of the
people, but as an effort to protect against potentially harmful consequences of
group discussion.
   To explore some of the advantages of heterogeneity, imagine a deliberating
body consisting of all citizens in the relevant group; this may mean all citizens in
a community, a state, a nation, or the world. By hypothesis, the argument pool
would be very large. It would be limited only to the extent that the set of citizen
views was similarly limited. Social in¯uences would undoubtedly remain. Hence
people might shift because of a desire to maintain their reputation and selfconception, by standing in a certain relation to the rest of the group. But to the
extent that deliberation revealed to people that their private position was
different, in relation to the group, from what they thought it was, any shift would
be in response to an accurate understanding of all relevant citizens, and not a
product of an accidentally skewed group sample.
   This thought experiment does not suggest that the hypothesized deliberating
body would be ideal. Perhaps all citizens, presenting all individual views, would
offer a skewed picture from the normative point of view; in a pervasively unjust
society, a deliberating body consisting of everyone may produce nothing to
celebrate. Perhaps weak arguments would be made and repeated and repeated
again, while good arguments would be offered infrequently. As we will see
below, it is often important to ensure enclaves in which polarization will take
place, precisely in order to ensure the emergence of views that are suppressed, by
social in¯uences or otherwise, but reasonable or even right. But at least a
deliberating body of all citizens would remove some of the distortions in the
group polarization experiments, where generally like-minded people, not
exposed to others, shift in large part because of that limited exposure. Hence
the outcomes of these deliberations will not be a product of the arbitrariness that
can be introduced by skewed argument pools.


                                                                                                 14679760, 2002, 2, 190                                  CASS R. SUNSTEIN


C. ENCLAVE DELIBERATION AND SUPPRESSED VOICES
The discussion has yet to focus on the potential vices of heterogeneity and the
potentially desirable effects of deliberating ``enclaves,'' consisting of groups of
like-minded individuals. It seems obvious that such groups can be extremely
important in a heterogeneous society, not least because members of some
demographic groups tend to be especially quiet when participating in broader
deliberative bodies. In this light, a special advantage of what we might call
``enclave deliberation'' is that it promotes the development of positions that
would otherwise be invisible, silenced, or squelched in general debate. While this
is literally dangerous in numerous contexts, it can also be a great advantage;
many desirable social movements have been made possible through this route.
The efforts of marginalized groups to exclude outsiders, and even of political
parties to limit their primaries to party members, can be justi®ed in similar terms.
Even if group polarization is at workÐindeed because group polarization is at
workÐenclaves can provide a wide range of social bene®ts, not least because
they greatly enrich the social ``argument pool.''
   The central empirical point here is that in deliberating bodies, high-status
members tend to initiate communication more than others, and their ideas are
more in¯uential, partly because low-status members lack con®dence in their own
abilities, partly because they fear retribution.23 For example, women's ideas are
often less in¯uential and sometimes are ``suppressed altogether in mixed-gender
groups,''24 and in ordinary circumstances, cultural minorities have disproportionately little in¯uence on decisions by cultural mixed groups.25
Interestingly, there is evidence that with changes in gender norms, some tasks
show no gender differences in in¯uence on groups; this evidence con®rming the
claim that people's role in group deliberation will be in¯uenced by whether social
norms produce status hierarchies. In these circumstances, it makes sense to
promote deliberating enclaves in which members of multiple groups may speak
with one another and develop their views.
   But there is a serious danger in such enclaves. The danger is that through the
mechanisms of social in¯uence and persuasive arguments, members will move to
positions that lack merit but are predictable consequences of the particular
circumstances of enclave deliberation. In the extreme case, enclave deliberation may
even put social stability at risk (for better or for worse). And it is impossible to say,
in the abstract, that those who sort themselves into enclaves will generally move in
a direction that is desirable for society at large or even for its own members.
   There is no simple solution to the dangers of enclave deliberation. Sometimes
the threat to social stability is desirable. From the standpoint of institutional
      See Christenson and Abbott, ``Team medical decision making,'' p. 273.
      Ibid., p. 274.
      C. Kirchmeyer and A. Cohen, ``Multicultural groups: their performance and reactions with
constructive con¯ict,'' Group and Organization Management, 17 (1992), 153.


                                                                                                           14679760, 2002, 2,                              THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                                          191


design, the problem is that any effort to promote enclave deliberation will ensure
group polarization among a wide range of groups, some necessary to the pursuit
of justice, others likely to promote injustice, and some potentially quite
dangerous. In this light we should be able to see more clearly the sense in
which Edmund Burke's conception of representationÐrejecting ``local purposes''
and ``local prejudices'' in favor of ``the general reason of the whole''26Ðis not
contingently but is instead essentially conservative (speaking purely descriptively,
as a safeguard of existing practices). The reason is that the submersion of ``local
purposes'' and ``local prejudices'' into a heterogenous ``deliberative assembly''
will inevitably tend to weaken the resolve of groupsÐand particularly low-status
or marginalized groupsÐwhose purely internal deliberations would produce a
high degree of polarization.
   Hence James MadisonÐwith his fear of popular passions producing ``a rage
for paper money, for an abolition of debts, for an equal division of property, or
for any other improper or wicked project''27Ðwould naturally be drawn to a
Burkean conception of representation, favoring large election districts and long
length of service28 to counteract the forces of polarization. By contrast, those
who believe that ``destabilization'' is an intrinsic good, or that the status quo
contains suf®cient injustice that it is worthwhile to incur the risks of encouraging
polarization on the part of diverse groups, will, or should, be drawn to a system
that enthusiastically promotes insular deliberation within enclaves.
   In a nation in which most people are confused or evil, enclave deliberation may
be the only way to develop a sense of clarity or justice, at least for some. But even
in such a nation, enclave deliberation is unlikely to produce change unless its
members are eventually brought into contact with others. In democratic societies,
the best response is to ensure that any such enclaves are not walled off from
competing views, and that at certain points there is an exchange of views between
enclave members and those who disagree with them. It is total or near-total selfinsulation, rather than group deliberation as such, that carries with it the most
serious dangers, often in the highly unfortunate (and sometimes deadly)
combination of extremism with marginality.


D. THE PUBLIC SPHERE AND APPROPRIATE HETEROGENEITY


1. The Public Sphere
A reasonable conclusion would return to the need for full information, not only
about facts but also about relevant values and options, and suggest that for a
      See ``Speech to the electors (Nov. 3, 1774),'' reprinted in Burke's Politics, ed. R. J. S. Hoffman
and P. Levack (New York: A. A. Knopf, 1949), p. 116.
      See The Federalist, No. 10.
      See Cass R. Sunstein, ``Interest groups in American public law,'' Stanford Law Review, 38
(1985), 29±87 at p. 42.


                                                                                                          14679760, 2002, 2, 192                                     CASS R. SUNSTEIN


designer or leader of any institution, it makes sense to promote ample social
space both for enclave deliberation and for discussions involving a broad array of
views, including those who have been within diverse enclaves. The idea of a
``public sphere,'' developed most prominently by JuÈrgen Habermas, can be
understood as an effort to ensure a domain in which multiple views can be heard
by people with multiple perspectives.29 Of course any argument pool will be
limited. No one has time to listen to every point of view. But an understanding of
group polarization helps show that heterogeneous groups are often a far better
source of good judgments, simply because more arguments will be made
available.

2. A New Look at Group Representation
The point very much bears on the continuing debate over proportional or group
representation.30 On one approach, political groups should be allowed to have
representation to the extent that they are able to get more than a minimal share
of the vote. On another approach, steps would be taken to increase the likelihood
that members of disadvantaged or marginal groupsÐperhaps African±
Americans, religious minorities, gays and lesbians, womenÐwould have their
own representatives in the deliberating body. The decision whether to move in
one or another direction depends on many factors, and an understanding of
group polarization is hardly suf®cient. But at least it can be said that proportional
or group representation draws strength from the goal of ensuring exposure to a
diverse range of views. On the one hand, group representation should help
counteract the risks of polarization, and susceptibility to cascade effects, that
come from deliberation among like-minded people. On the other hand, group
representation should help reduce the dangers that come from insulation of those
in the smaller enclave, by subjecting enclave representations to a broader debate.
For these purposes, it might well be insuf®cient that representatives, not
themselves members of any enclave, are electorally accountable to constituents
who include enclave members. The point of group representation is to promote a
process in which those in the enclave hear what others have to say, and in which
those in other enclaves, or in no enclaves at all, are able to listen to people with
very different points of view.

3. Appropriate Heterogeneity
The principal quali®cation here is that the real question is how to ensure
appropriate heterogeneity. For example, it would not make sense to say that in a
deliberating group attempting to think through issues of af®rmative action, it is
      See JuÈrgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere, trans. Thomas Burger
and Frederick Lawrence (Oxford: Polity; 1989), pp. 231±50.
      See Anne Phillips, The Politics of Presence (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995); Iris Young,
Justice and the Politics of Difference (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1990), pp. 183±91;
Cass R. Sunstein, ``Beyond the republican revival.'' Yale Law Journal, 97 (1988), 1539 at pp. 1585±9.


                                                                                                    14679760, 2002, 2,                            THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                                     193


important to allow exposure to people who think that slavery was good and
should be restored. The constraints of time and attention call for limits to
heterogeneity; andÐa separate pointÐfor good deliberation to take place, some
views are properly placed off the table, simply because time is limited and they
are so invidious, implausible, or both. This point might seem to create a ®nal
conundrum: To know what points of view should be represented in any group
deliberation, it is important to have a good sense of the substantive issues
involved, indeed a suf®ciently good sense as to generate judgments about what
points of view must be included and excluded. But if we already know that, why
should we not proceed directly to the merits? If we already know that, before
deliberation occurs, does deliberation have any point at all?
   The answer is that we often do know enough to know which views count as
reasonable, without knowing which view counts as right, and this point is
suf®cient to allow people to construct deliberative processes that should correct
for the most serious problems potentially created by group deliberation. What is
necessary is not to allow every view to be heard, but to ensure that no single view
is so widely heard, and reinforced, that people are unable to engage in critical
evaluation of the reasonable competitors.


E. THE DELIBERATIVE OPINION POLL: A CONTRAST
In an interesting combination of theoretical and empirical work, James Fishkin
has pioneered the idea of a ``deliberative opinion poll,'' in which small groups,
consisting of highly diverse individuals, are asked to come together and to
deliberate about various issues. Deliberative opinion polls have now been
conducted in several nations, including the United States, England and Australia.
Fishkin ®nds some noteworthy shifts in individual views; but he does not ®nd a
systematic tendency toward polarization. In his studies, individuals shift both
toward and away from the median of predeliberation views.
   In England, for example, deliberation led to reduced interest in using
imprisonment as a tool for combatting crime.31 The percentage believing that
``sending more offenders to prison'' is an effective way to prevent crime went
down from 57 per cent to 38 per cent; the percentage believing that fewer people
should be sent to prison increased from 29 per cent to 44 per cent; belief in the
effectiveness of ``stiffer sentences'' was reduced from 78 per cent to 65 per cent.
Similar shifts were shown in the direction of greater enthusiasm for procedural
rights of defendants and increased willingness to explore alternatives to prison. In
other experiments with the deliberative opinion poll, shifts included a mixture of
®ndings, with larger percentages of individuals concluding that legal pressures
should be increased on fathers for child support (from 70 per cent to 85 per cent)
      See James Fishkin, The Voice of the People (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1995),
pp. 206±7.


                                                                                        14679760, 2002, 2, 194                              CASS R. SUNSTEIN


and that welfare and health care should be turned over to the states (from 56 per
cent to 66 per cent). Indeed, on many particular issues, the effect of deliberation
was to create an increase in the intensity with which people held their preexisting convictions. These ®ndings are consistent with the prediction of group
polarization. But this was hardly a uniform pattern, and on some questions
deliberation increased the percentage of people holding a minority position (with,
for example, a jump from 36 per cent to 57 per cent of people favoring policies
making divorce ``harder to get''). These are not the changes that would be
predicted by group polarization.
   There appear to be several factors distinguishing the deliberative opinion poll
from experiments on group polarization. First, Fishkin's deliberators did not vote
as a group, and opinions were collected both individually and con®dentially;
while group polarization is observed when no group decision is expected, the
extent of polarization is likely to decrease, simply because members have not
been asked to sign onto a group decision as such. Second, Fishkin's experiments
involved random sampling of the population, designed to create a diverse and
representative microcosm (note, though, that group polarization can and does
occur within diverse groups). Third, the relevant experiments contained balanced
panels of experts, able to respond to questions from small group discussions.
Fourth, Fishkin's groups were overseen by moderators, trained to make sure that
no one dominates the discussion, to ensure general participation, and to ensure a
level of openness likely to alter some of the dynamics discussed here. Fifth,
Fishkin's studies presented participants with a set of written materials that
attempted to be balanced and that contained detailed arguments on both sides.
The likely consequence would be to move people in different directions from
those that would be expected by simple group discussion, unaffected by external
materials inevitably containing a degree of authority. Indeed, the very effort
to produce balance should be expected to shift large majorities into small
ones, pressing both sides closer to 50 per cent representation; and this is in
fact what was observed in many of the outcomes in deliberative opinion
polls.
   In short, the external materials and expert panels shift the argument pool
available to the deliberators and are also likely to have effects on social in¯uence.
Once certain arguments are on the table, it is harder to say how one or another
position will affect a group member's reputation. Taken as a whole, a signi®cant
amount of Fishkin's data nonetheless seems consistent with the group
polarization hypothesis. What does not is probably a product of some
combination of moderator behavior, effects of external presentation, and
deviations produced by convincing arguments from members of the particular
groups involved. The most sensible conclusion is that the existence of monitors,
an absence of a group decision, the great heterogeneity of the people involved in
Fishkin's studies, together with the external arguments, makes the deliberative
opinion poll quite different from the group polarization studies, in which small


                                                                                     14679760, 2002, 2,                        THE LAW OF GROUP POLARIZATION                          195


groups of deliberators have relatively clear antecedent tendencies in one or
another direction.
   There are large lessons here about appropriate institutional design for
deliberating bodies. Group polarization can be heightened, diminished, and
possibly even eliminated with seemingly small alterations in institutional
arrangements. To the extent that limited argument pools and social in¯uences
are likely to have unfortunate effects, correctives can be introduced, perhaps
above all by exposing group members, at one point or another, to arguments to
which they are not antecedently inclined. To the extent that institutional
proposals are intended to increase public participation by promoting deliberation
by ordinary people, they would do well to incorporate an understanding of these
facts, which are sometimes neglected. The value of deliberation, as a social
phenomenon, depends very much on social contextÐon the nature of the process
and the nature of the participants. Here institutions are crucial. One of the most
important lessons is among the most general: It is desirable to create spaces for
enclave deliberation without insulating enclave members from those with
opposing views, and without insulating those outside of the enclave from the
views of those within it.