The Annals of Applied Statistics
                                         2015, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1394–1414
                                         DOI: 10.1214/15-AOAS831
                                          c Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2015


                                                          DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION

                                                                                   By Matt Taddy
arXiv:1311.6139v4 [stat.AP] 5 Nov 2015


                                                                                 University of Chicago
                                                          This article introduces a model-based approach to distributed
                                                      computing for multinomial logistic (softmax) regression. We treat
                                                      counts for each response category as independent Poisson regressions
                                                      via plug-in estimates for fixed effects shared across categories. The
                                                      work is driven by the high-dimensional-response multinomial models that are used in analysis of a large number of random counts.
                                                      Our motivating applications are in text analysis, where documents
                                                      are tokenized and the token counts are modeled as arising from a
                                                      multinomial dependent upon document attributes. We estimate such
                                                      models for a publicly available data set of reviews from Yelp, with
                                                      text regressed onto a large set of explanatory variables (user, business, and rating information). The fitted models serve as a basis for
                                                      exploring the connection between words and variables of interest, for
                                                      reducing dimension into supervised factor scores, and for prediction.
                                                      We argue that the approach herein provides an attractive option for
                                                      social scientists and other text analysts who wish to bring familiar
                                                      regression tools to bear on text data.


                                            1. Introduction. This article is motivated by data sets that include
                                         counts in a massive number of categories, such as text corpora (counts for
                                         words), browser logs (counts on websites), and website tracking (counts of
                                         clicks). The unit upon which counts are observed—for example, a “document” for text or a “user” in web analysis—is annotated with attributes,
                                         additional information about each document (author, date, etc.) or user
                                         (age, purchases, etc.). Much of contemporary Big Data analysis involves
                                         some exploration, inference, and prediction of, or controlling for, the relationship between these attributes and the associated very high-dimensional
                                         counts.                                                               P
                                            Say ci is a vector of counts in d categories, summing to mi = j cij ,
                                         accompanied by a p-dimensional attribute vector vi on observation unit i

                                            Received December 2013; revised April 2015.
                                            Key words and phrases. Distributed computing, MapReduce, logistic regression, lasso,
                                         text analysis, multinomial inverse regression, computational social science.

                                          This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
                                          Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Statistics,
                                          2015, Vol. 9, No. 3, 1394–1414. This reprint differs from the original in pagination
                                          and typographic detail.
2                                  M. TADDY

of n total. For example, in the archetypal text mining application, ci are
counts for words in document i annotated with metadata vi . We connect
attributes and counts through a big multinomial logistic regression model,
                         p(ci |vi , mi ) = MN(ci ; qi , mi )
(1)
                                                                            d
                                   eηij                                     X
                       where qij =      , ηij = αj + vi′ ϕj    and   Λi =         eηik .
                                    Λi
                                                                            k=1

The multinomial denoted MN here has, for unit i, category j, probability
qij , and size mi . This model can be computationally expensive to estimate
for a large number of response categories (i.e., big ci dimension d). Even
a single likelihood evaluation
                             P is costly, due to the sum required for each
normalizing intensity Λi = dk=1 eηik . The methodological innovation of the
current article is to replace Λi with initial estimates, then condition upon
these plug-ins when estimating (1) through d individual Poisson regressions
for counts in each category j. This model-based factorization allows one to
partition computation across many independent machines, so with enough
processors the system of (1) is fit in the time required for a single Poisson
regression.
    We refer to this framework as distributed multinomial regression, or DMR.
Our work here extends ideas from Taddy (2013a), which introduced the
strategy of multinomial inverse regression (MNIR). That article argues for
estimation of models like (1) as the first step in an inverse regression routine
for predicting elements of new vi . However, Taddy (2013a) relies upon a
fitting algorithm that collapses response counts across equal vi , and hence
scales only for a small number of attributes (i.e., when p is just one or
two). That article is also focused exclusively on applications in attribute
prediction. The purpose of the current article is thus twofold: to supply
techniques for estimation when both c and v are high dimensional, and to
motivate how these models can be useful in many aspects of analysis and
inference.
    Much of the paper is devoted to an example analysis of reviews on Yelp—
an Internet platform for feedback on various establishments, including restaurants, barbers, schools, and much else. This data set has a rich feature set
associated with a wide variety of reviews. The data are also publicly available, after (free) registration on the data mining contest website kaggle.
com. Moreover, our technology is provided in the distrom package for R and
Yelp analysis code is cataloged at github.com/mataddy/yelp. Public access
is essential here: our goal is to provide a complete template for analysis of
high-dimensional count data.
    The estimation strategy is detailed in Section 2, including model factorization, plug-ins for Λi , and regularization path estimation within each


                   DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                                 3

parallel regression. Methods are illustrated in the short classification example of Section 3, which shows utility for DMR not only in big d but also
as a speedup for small d multinomial regressions. Finally, Section 4 runs
through our full Yelp application, detailing model estimation and a variety
of analyses. These analyses each correspond to a different inferential goal.

   Exploration: What words are associated with funny or useful content?
Here, we interpret the fitted regression model at the level of word loadings.
We emphasize that these loadings represent partial effects—connections between text and attributes that arise after controlling for collinearity between
attributes—and we describe how the interpretations change when controlling for more or less confounding information.

   Dimension reduction: Which reviews have the most funny or useful content? Once the model has been fit, it acts as a map between text and
attributes. We describe how to use this map to obtain sufficient reductions:
low-dimensional scores that summarize text content directly relevant to a
given attribute. We show that the sufficient reduction for, say, funny votes,
is a seemingly better judge of humor than the original yelp voters (because
reviews can generate funny votes for correlated but unfunny reasons).

   Prediction: What will be the usefulness or hilarity of a new review? We
consider performance of the above sufficient reductions as input to prediction algorithms, and find that they can match or outperform comparable
techniques that use the full text as input.

   Treatment effects: Does user tenure lead to higher ratings? Finally, we
show how to use the sufficient reductions as synthetic controls in regressions
that wish to remove from a targeted treatment effect the influence of any
correlated text content. That is, the sufficient reductions act like a textbased propensity; in our application, we use them to see if older users are
more positive in their ratings even if we control for the change in their review
content.
   Section 5 closes with a discussion and some practical advice for applications in text mining. We argue that, for many social science and business
applications, the methods herein make regression of text onto observed attributes an attractive alternative to techniques such as topic modeling which
require estimation and interpretation of a latent space.

  2. Methods: Estimation in distribution. We adopt terminology from text
analysis for the remainder and refer to each unit i as a “document” and
each category j as a “word.”1 Suppose that every document–word count cij
    Even in text mining this is a simplification; each j could be a combination of words
or any other language token.


4                                   M. TADDY

has been drawn independently Po(eηij )—Poisson with intensity (i.e., mean)
eηij . The joint document likelihood for ci then factorizes as the product of
a multinomial distribution for individual counts conditional on total count
mi and a Poisson distribution on mi :
                       Y
(2)           p(ci ) =   Po(cij ; eηij ) = MN(ci ; qi , mi ) Po(mi ; Λi ).
                       j

   This well-known result has long been used by statisticians to justify ignoring whether sampling was conditional on margin totals in analysis of
contingency tables. Birch (1963) showed that the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) of qi is unchanged under a variety of sampling models for
3-way tables under the constraint that Λi = mi . This is satisfied at the MLE
for a saturated model. Palmgren (1981) extends the theory to log-linear regression with ηij = αj + µi + ϕ′j vi , showing that the Fisher information on
coefficients is the same regardless of whether or not you have conditioned on
mi so long as µi in the Poisson model is estimated at its conditional MLE,
                                               
                               ⋆           mi
(3)                           µi = log P ηij .
                                           je

   Most commonly, (2) is invoked when applying multinomial logistic regression: totals mi are then ancillary and the µi drop out of the likelihood. Our
DMR framework takes the opposite view: if we are willing to fix estimates
µ̂i potentially not at their MLE (we will argue for µ̂i = log mi ), then the
factorized Poisson likelihood can be analyzed independently across response
categories.2 As highlighted in the Introduction, this yields distributed computing algorithms for estimation on previously impossible scales. Indeed, we
have observed in text and web analysis a recent migration from multinomial models—say, for latent factorization—to Poisson model schemes; see
Gopalan, Hofman and Blei (2013) as an example. From the perspective of
this article, such strategies are Big Data approximations to their multinomial precursors.

   2.1. Estimating baseline intensity. The negative log likelihood implied
by (1) is proportional to
                         n           d
                           "                !         #
                       X            X
                                        ηij      ′
(4)                         mi log     e      − ci η i .
                           i=1         j=1
   In an older version of this idea, Hodges and Le Cam (1960) introduce a Poisson
approximation to the binomial distribution, for which McDonald (1980) provides error
bounds and extension to multinomials.


                   DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                                 5

It is easy to verify that adding observation fixed effects µi to each ηij in
(4) leaves the likelihood unchanged. In contrast, the corresponding Poisson
model, unconditional on mi , has negative log likelihood proportional to
                           d X
                           X n
(5)                                  [eµi +ηij − cij (µi + ηij )]
                           j=1 i=1

with gradient on each µi of g(µi ) = eµi j eηij − mi , and is clearly sensitive
                                         P
to these observation “baseline intensities.” As mentioned above, the solution
for the parameters of ηij is unchanged between (4) and (5) if each µi is set
to its conditional MLE in (3).
   Unfortunately, if our goal is to separate inference for ϕj across different
j, the MLE formula of (3) will create a computational bottleneck: each
category-j Poisson regression requires updates to µ⋆ = [µ⋆1 · · · µ⋆n ]′ during
estimation. Distributed computation precludes such communication, and we
instead use the simple plug-in estimator
(6)                                    µ̂i = log mi .
This choice is justified as optimal in a few simple models, and we rely upon
empirical evidence to claim it performs well in more complex settings.3
   The
    P gradient     of the Poisson likelihood in (5) on µi at our plug-in is g(µ̂i ) =
         η
mi ( i e − 1). Define the plug-in MLEs η̂ i = [η̂i1 · · · η̂id ]′ as those which
          ij

minimize the Poisson objective in (5) under µi = µ̂i . Then in the three simple
settings below, g(µ̂i ) = 0 for η i = η̂ i . This implies that µ̂i is the optimal joint
MLE estimate for µi , and thus that {η̂ i , µ̂i } minimize the Poisson objective
in (5) while {η̂ i } minimizes the logistic multinomial objective in (4):
• In a saturated model, with each ηij free, η̂ij = log(cij ) − µ̂i = log(cij /mi )
  and g(µ̂i ) = 0.                                                      P
• With
     P intercept-only      ηij = αj , the Poisson   MLE is α̂j = log      i cij −
  log i eµ̂i = log( i cij /M ) where M = i mi , and g(µ̂i ) = mi ( j i cij /
                    P                        P                         P P

  M − 1) = 0.                                                            P
• Consider aP  single vi ∈ {0,P
                              1} such that ηij = αj +vi ϕj . Write Cvj = i:vi =v cij
  and Mv = i:vi =v mi = j Cvj . Then the Poisson MLE are α̂j = log(C0j /
                                                                     P
  M0 ) and ϕ̂j = log(C1j /M1 )−log(C0j /M0 ), so that g(µ̂i ) = mi ( j Cvi j /Mvi −
  1) = 0.
Of course, these examples do not form a general result: the situation is more
complicated with correlated covariates or under regularization. But they illustrate analytically why we might expect the performance we have seen

  3                                                        P        ′
     Note that, when compared to (3), the plug-in replaces j eαj +vi ϕj with 1. Adding a
constant to each αj leaves probabilities unchanged, so this can be made to hold without
affecting fit.


6                                         M. TADDY

empirically: estimates based upon µ̂i = log mi do not suffer in out-of-sample
validation. The resulting benefit is huge, as using a plug-in allows estimation of the Poisson regression equations to proceed in complete isolation
from each other. See the Appendix for an example MapReduce [Dean and
Ghemawat (2008)] implementation.

   2.2. Parallel Poisson regressions. Given baseline intensities fixed as µ̂i =
log mi , each of our d separate Poisson regressions has negative log likelihood
proportional to
                                   n
                                               ′
                                   X
(7)                l(αj , ϕj ) =     [mi eαj +vi ϕj − cij (αj + vi′ ϕj )].
                                   i=1
You are free to use your favorite estimation technique for each parallel regression. This section outlines our specific approach: “gamma lasso” L1 regularized deviance minimization.
   In high-dimensional regression, it can be useful to regularize estimation
through a penalty on coefficient size. This helps to avoid over-fit and stabilize
estimation. A very common form of regularization imposes L1 coefficient
costs [i.e., the lasso of Tibshirani (1996)], which, due to a nondifferentiable
cost spike at the origin, yields variable selection: some coefficient estimates
will be set to exactly zero. Our results here use weighted L1 regularization
                                         p
                       (                             )
                                         X
(8) α̂j , ϕ̂j = arg min l(αj , ϕj ) + nλ   ωjk |ϕjk |     where λ, ωjk ≥ 0.
                 αj ,ϕj
                                              k=1
Penalty size λ acts as a squelch that determines what you measure as signal and what you discard as noise. In practice, since optimal λ is unknown,
one solves a regularization path of candidate models minimizing (8) along
the grid λ1 > λ2 > · · · > λT . Inference is completed through selection along
this path, with optimal λt chosen to minimize cross-validation (CV) or information criteria (IC; e.g., Akaike’s AIC) estimated out-of-sample (OOS)
deviance (i.e., to minimize the average error for a given training algorithm
when used to predict new data). Crucially, selection is applied independently
for each category j regression, so that only a single set of coefficients need
be communicated back to a head node.
   Analysis in this article applies the gamma lasso algorithm of Taddy (2014),
wherein weights ωj diminish as a function of |ϕ̂j |.4 In particular, along the
grid of λt squelch values,
(9)                        t
                          ωjk = (1 + γ|ϕ̂t−1
                                         jk |)
                                               −1
                                                         for γ ≥ 0.
    The iteratively reweighted least squares algorithm in Section 6 of Taddy (2014) applies
directly to Poisson family regressions by setting each iteration’s “observation weights” eηij
and “weighted response” ηij + cij /eηij − 1.


                   DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                                    7

This includes the standard lasso at γ = 0. For γ > 0 it provides diminishing bias regularization, such that strong signals are less shrunk toward zero
than weak signals. This yields sparser ϕ̂, which reduces storage and communication needs, and can lead to lower false discovery rates. In practice, a
good default is γ = 0 (i.e., the lasso), but if that provides solutions that are
implausibly (or inconveniently) dense, one can experiment with increasing
γ.5
   For selection along the path, we minimize a corrected AIC [Hurvich and
Tsai (1989)]:
                                                       n
(10)               AICc: − 2l(α̂j , ϕ̂j ) + 2df j              ,
                                                  n − df j − 1
where df j is the estimated degrees of freedom used to fit {α̂j , ϕ̂j }. This
corrects the AIC’s tendency to over-fit, and Taddy (2014) finds that AICc
performs well with the gamma lasso. In Section 3, where computation costs
are very low, we also consider CV selection rules: both CV1se, which chooses
the largest λt with mean OOS deviance no more than one standard error
away from minimum, and CVmin, which chooses λt at lowest mean OOS
deviance.
   See Taddy (2014) for much more detail on these techniques. That article
reviews diminishing bias regularization by emphasizing its close relationship
to weighted L1 penalization.

   3. Example: Glass shards and a parallel softmax. Our motivating big-d
applications have the characteristic that mi is random, and usually pretty
big. For example, text mining mi is the total word count in document i,
and web analysis mi would be the total count of sites visited by a browser.
A Poisson model for mi is not farfetched. However, we also find that DMR
also does well in the more common softmax classification setting, where
mi = 1 always. It thus provides an everyday speedup for classification tasks:
even with small-d response categories, you’ll be able to fit the model almost d
times faster in distribution.6 Thus, before moving to our Yelp case study, we
look at the surprisingly strong performance of DMR in a simple classification
problem.
   This example considers the small forensic glass data set from Venables
and Ripley (2002), available in the MASS library for R under the name fgl.7
      All of our results use the gamlr implementation in R. The glass-shard example of
Section 3 sets γ = 0 for direct comparison to a lasso penalized alternative, while the Yelp
fits of Section 4 all use γ = 1 for more sparsity.
      In shared-memory parallelization we observe speedups close to linear in d, depending
upon machine architecture.
      For the code used in this example, type help(dmr) in R after loading the distrom
library.


8                                     M. TADDY


Fig. 1. Forensic glass. Regularization paths for each glass-type, with AICc selections
marked.


The data are 214 observations on shards of glass. The response of interest is
of 6 glass types: window float glass (WinF), window nonfloat glass (WinNF),
vehicle window glass (Veh), containers (Con), tableware (Tabl), and vehicle
headlamps (Head). Covariates for each shard are their refractive index and
%-by-weight composition among 8 oxides. Figure 1 shows Poisson regression
regularization paths for each glass type, with AICc selection marked by a
vertical dashed line.
   The response here is a single category, such that mi = 1 and µ̂i = 0 for all
i. This violates the assumption of Poisson generation: mi = 1 isP  not random.
                                                                            ′
For example, Figure 2 shows the conditional MLE µ⋆i = log(mi / j eα̂j +vi ϕ̂j )
at AICc selected coefficients. The result is distributed around, but not equal
to, the assumed plug-in of µ̂i = 0 for all i. However, dmr still works: Figure 3
shows the distribution for OOS error in a 20-fold OOS experiment, either
using AICc or CV selection on each individual Poisson regression, against


Fig. 2.   Forensic glass. The conditional MLEs µ⋆i implied at our DMR coefficient estimates.


                   DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                                 9


Fig. 3. Forensic glass. OOS deviance samples in a 20-fold OOS experiment. The net
models are from glment lasso multinomial logistic regression, and the dmr models are
our distributed multinomial regression approximation. The applied penalty selection rule
is indicated after each model.


CV selected models from a lasso path for full multinomial logistic (softmax)
regression as implemented in the glmnet package for R [Friedman, Hastie and
Tibshirani (2010)]. There are subtle differences (e.g., AICc DMR selection
has lower mean deviance with higher variance), but the full multinomial fits
(glmnet) do not have any clear advantage over the nearly d-times faster
approximation (distrom).

   4. Yelp case study. These data were supplied by the review site Yelp
for a data mining contest on kaggle.com. The data are available at www.
kaggle.com/c/yelp-recruiting/data, and code for processing and estimation is at github.com/TaddyLab/yelp. We consider business, user, and
review data sets in the yelp training data collection. The reviews, for all
sorts of businesses, were recorded on January 19, 2013 for a sample of locations near to Phoenix, AZ. The goal of the competition was to predict the
combined number of “funny,” “useful,” or “cool” (f/u/c) votes that a given
review receives from other users. Such information can be used by yelp to
promote f/u/c reviews before waiting for the users to grade them as such.
   After detailing the data and model in Section 4.1, we describe a series of
statistical analyses.
   Section 4.2: Investigate model fit under a range of regularization schemes,
looking at how word loadings change with the relative weight of penalty on
variables of interest vs controls.
   Section 4.3: Use the ideas of “sufficient reduction” to project text through
the model onto topics relevant to f/u/c votes or star ratings, and interpret
the resulting factor spaces.
   Section 4.4: Use the sufficient reductions in prediction of the number of
f/u/c votes (i.e., the original kaggle task), and compare OOS performance
against that of a word-count regression.


10                                   M. TADDY

   Section 4.5: Use the sufficient reductions in treatment effect estimation—
for the effect of user experience on rating—while controlling for heterogeneity in review content.
By viewing text data as a big multinomial regression, we are able to address
all of the above (and resolve the effects of many collinear attributes on review
text) through a single model fit.

   4.1. Data and model specification. The data are n = 215,879 reviews on
11,535 businesses by 43,873 users.8 Review text is split on whitespace and tokenized into words (including combinations of punctuation: potential emoticons). After stripping some common suffixes (e.g., “s,” “ing,” “ly”) and
removing a very small set of stopwords (e.g., “the,” “and,” “or”), we count
frequencies for d = 13,938 words occurring in more than 20 (<0.01%) of the
reviews (total word count is M = 17,581,214). Metadata includes review,
business, and user attributes:
• stars: review star rating (out of 5), from which we subtract the business
  average rating.
• Review counts for funny, useful, or cool votes. We divide these by the
  square root of review age, which yields metrics roughly uncorrelated with
  the posting date.
• usr.count: a user’s total number of reviews at time of posting the given
  review.
• usr.stars: a user’s average star rating across all of their reviews.
• A user’s average usr.funny, usr.useful, or usr.cool votes per review.
• Business average star rating biz.stars and review count biz.count.
• Business location among 61 possible cities surrounding (and including)
  Phoenix.
• Business classification according to Yelp’s nonexclusive (and partially user
  generated) taxonomy. We track membership for 333 categories containing
  more than 5 businesses.
This yields 405 variables for each review. We also specify random effects9
for each of the 11,535 businesses, leading to total attribute dimension p =
11,940. Data components are the n × d document–term matrix C, the nvector of row-totals m, and the n × p attribute matrix V.
   We split each row of the attribute matrix into two elements: ai , the 11
numeric review attributes from stars through biz.count, and bi , a length11,929 vector of dummy indicators for business identity, location, and Yelp
    We have removed reviews with unknown user.
    We call these random, rather than fixed, effects because they are estimated under a
penalty which shrinks them toward an overall mean. They will be estimated and we do
not marginalize over them.


                   DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                               11

classification. This is done to differentiate the variables we deem of primary
interest (ai ) from those which we include as controls (bi ); write V = [A B]
as the resulting partition. Columns of A are normalized to have mean zero
and variance one. The multinomial regression of (1) is adapted by similarly
splitting each ϕj = [ϕaj , ϕbj ] and rewriting category intensities ηij = αj +
a′i ϕaj + b′i ϕbj .

  4.2. Multinomial model fit and interpretation. Following the recipe of
Section 2.2, each word’s Poisson regression is estimated
                                        X                          
                                             a    a      1X b b
(11) α̂j , ϕ̂j = arg min l(αj , ϕj ) + nλ   ωjk |ϕjk | +   ωjk |ϕjk | ,
                  αj ,ϕj                                 τ
                                               k                k
                    Pn          αj +a′i ϕa   ′ b
                                         j +bi ϕj
where l(αj , ϕj ) = i=1 [mi e                − cij (αj + a′i ϕaj + b′i ϕbj )]. The relative penalty weight τ > 0 controls differential regularization between the
target variables and the controls. At larger τ values, there is less penalty on
ϕbj and the effect of bi on cij has less opportunity to pollute our estimate
for ϕaj . That is, ϕ̂aj becomes more purely a partial effect. At the extreme
of τ = ∞, any collinearity with bi is to be completely removed from the
estimated ϕ̂aj .
   As outlined in the Appendix, counts for the 14k words are partitioned into
256 files. Each file is then read by one of 64 workstations, which itself uses
16 cores in parallel to run through the Poisson regressions. Each individual
regression is a full gamma lasso path solution over grids of 100 λt squelch
values, with weights ωjk at , ω bt updated as in (9) under γ = 1, and AICc sejk
lected coefficients are then written to file. The entire problem (including the
sufficient reduction projection of our next section) takes around 1/2 hour.
   Regularization paths for a few of the Poisson regressions, estimated under
τ = 2 relative penalty weight, are shown in Figure 4. Coefficient values are
scaled to the effect of 1sd change in the corresponding attribute. We see, for
example, that at our AICc selection the effect of a 1sd increase in review
stars multiplies the expected count (or odds, in the multinomial model) for
the happy face :-) by around exp 0.38 ≈ 1.46, the “hmmm” face :-/ by
exp −0.15 ≈ 0.86, and the sad face :-( by exp −0.35 ≈ 0.7. Notice that :-/
and :-( both occur more often in low-star (negative) reviews, but that :-/
is associated with useful content, while :-( is uncool.
   The relative penalty divisor τ allows us to specify the amount of word
count variation that is allocated the control variables in B. Such differential
penalization is a powerful tool in Big Data analysis, as it allows one to isolate
partial effects in messy overdetermined systems. Unfortunately, unlike for
λ, we have no objective criterion with which to choose τ . Since it weights
the penalty on variables whose effect we would like to remove from our
targeted coefficients, one could argue that τ = ∞ is the optimal choice. In


12                                    M. TADDY


Fig. 4. Yelp. Poisson regression regularization paths for counts of the tokens :-), :-/,
and :-( under relative penalty weight τ = 2. Coefficient values have been multiplied by
the corresponding covariate standard deviation. The legend highlights select covariates,
regression degrees of freedom are on the top axis, and our AICc selected estimates are
marked with vertical dashed lines.


practice, however, this can lead to inference for the coefficients of interest
that is dependent upon only a small subset of documents (since variation
in the others is saturated by the controls). We advise using whatever prior
knowledge is available to evaluate the appropriateness of results under a
range of τ .
   For example, Table 1 investigates fit under increasing τ . The numbers of
nonzero ϕ̂ajk (i.e., deemed useful for OOS prediction by AICc) are decreasing
with τ for all attributes. This is because B accounts for more variation in
C at higher τ , and there is little residual variation left for A. Here, τ = 2
yields top words only indirectly associated with our attributes (e.g., prik is
positive because Thai food gets high ratings), while full τ = ∞ control leads
to near perfect fit and infinite likelihoods conditional on B alone. To our
eye, τ = 20 manages a good balance: there remain many significant ϕ̂ajk 6= 0,
but the model has avoided loading words that are not directly associated
with the given attributes. This fit is used in the remainder of our study.

   4.3. Sufficient reduction. The previous section’s coefficient estimates, resolving a complex system of relationships between words and attributes,
provide a rich basis for storytelling and exploratory analysis. For many, this
is either the end goal or a jumping-off point (e.g., to experiments testing
hypotheses generated in exploration). But in our practice, a primary reason


                     DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                                 13

                                          Table 1
Top 10 words by loading on review characteristics, as a function of relative penalty weight
 τ . The top row for each attribute corresponds to terms ordered by marginal correlations

         τ ϕ̂ 6= 0Top ten words by loading

         Marginal Great love amaz favorite deliciou best awesome alway perfect excellent
+Stars     2 8440 Unmatch salute :-)) prik laurie pheonix trove banoffee exquisite sublime
          20 3077 Heaven perfection gem divine amaz die superb phenomenal fantastic
                  deliciousnes
         200 508 Gem heaven awesome wonderful amaz fantastic favorite love notch fabulou
         Marginal Not worst ask horrib minut rude said told would didn
−Stars     2 8440 Rude livid disrespect disgrace inexcusab grossest incompet audacity unmelt
                  acknowledge
          20 3077 Rude incompet unaccept unprofession inedib worst apolog disrespect insult
                  acknowledge
         200 508 Worst horrib awful rude inedib terrib worse tasteles disgust waste
         Marginal You that know like your yelp . . . what don who
Funny      2 6508 Dimsum rue reggae acne meathead roid bong crotch peni fart
          20 1785 Bitch shit god dude boob idiot fuck hell drunk laugh
         200 120 Bitch dear god hell face shit hipst dude man kidd
         Marginal That yelp you thi know biz-photo like all http ://
Useful     2 5230 Fiancee rife dimsum maitre jpg poultry harissa bureau redirect breakdown
          20 884 biz-photo meow harissa www bookmark :-/ http :// (?), tip
         200 33 www http :// com factor already final immediate ask hope
         Marginal Yelp you that biz-photo http :// www know like your
Cool       2 4031 Boulder lewi rogue lagunita wanton celebratory hanker politic mozzerella
                  onsite
          20 577 Userid htm cen rand poem sultry arlin brimm cubic inspiration
         200 11 Biz-photo select yelp along certain fil chose house


for fitting big multinomial models is as a tool for dimension reduction, mapping from the original d-dimensional text down to univariate indices that
contain all information relevant to a given attribute.
   Cook (2007) outlines use of regression models with high-dimensional response as a map to project from that response onto interesting covariates.
Taddy (2013a) extends the idea in our context of big multinomials, motivated by applications in text analysis. Both of these articles are focused on
inverse regression (IR), a technique wherein the fitted model map is applied
for prediction of unobserved covariates (e.g., the votes associated with new
review text, as in Section 4.4). However, the IR algorithms are prefaced on
a more basic concept of sufficient reduction (SR), which is useful beyond its
application in IR prediction.


14                                    M. TADDY

 Consider observation ci from a d-dimensional exponential family linear
model, with natural parameter η i = [ηi1 · · · ηd ]′ , ηij = αj + vi ϕj , such that
(12)                     p(ci ) = h(ci ) exp[c′i η i + A(η i )],
where h is a function of only data (not η i ) while A is a function of only
parameters (not ci ). Both the full multinomial logistic regression model
(conditional upon mi ) or our independent Poisson’s model (conditional upon
µ̂i ) can be written as in (12). Then with Φ = [ϕ1 · · · ϕd ] the p × d matrix of
regression coefficients, we get
                          ′
(13)     p(ci ) = h(ci )eci α exp[c′i Φ′ vi + A(Φ′ vi )] = h̃(ci )g(Φci , vi ),
so that the likelihood factorizes into a function of ci only and another function of vi that depends upon ci only through the projection Φci . This implies
that, conditional upon the regression parameters, Φci is a sufficient statistic
for vi . That is, vi ⊥⊥ ci |Φci .
   We call zi = Φci an SR projection. In practice, we work with estimated
SR projections zi = Φ̂ci and hope that Φ̂ has been estimated well enough for
zi to be a useful summary [see Taddy (2013b) for discussion]. In that case,
Φ̂ provides a linear map from text into the p-dimensional attribute space.
This works just like the rotation matrix from common principal components
analysis except that, instead of mapping into latent factors, Φ projects into
observed attributes. The resulting zi are model-based sufficient statistics,
useful in the same roles as a traditional sufficient statistic (like x̄). For
example, to predict vik from ci we can work with univariate zik instead of
the d-dimensional original text. In general, SR projections are a simple way
to organize information in Big Data systems. When new text ci arrives, one
need just feed it through Φ to obtain zi indices which can be summarized,
plotted, and analyzed as desired.
   It is important to emphasize that, since estimated loadings ϕ̂ik are partial
effects (influence of other attributes has been controlled for), zik will also
correspond to partial rather than marginal association. As another way to
see this, note that the factorization in (13) is easily manipulated to show sufficiency for each individual zik conditional on vi,−k , our vector of attributes
omitting the kth. Thus, SR reduces dimension into a space of information
directly relevant to an attribute of interest, where influence of text variation due to other attributes has been removed or minimized. Consider the
correlation matrices in Figure 5. The original vote attributes are highly positively correlated, while the text projections are either nearly independent
(e.g., useful against either funny or cool) or strongly negatively correlated
(funny and cool). This suggests that there are underlying factors that encourage votes in any category; only after controlling for these confounding
factors do we see the true association between f/u/c content. Similarly, all


                    DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                                      15

                                    Correlation matrices
           Attributes (v)                          Text projections (z)
               f     u     c      ⋆                     f       u       c       ⋆
          f 1       0.7 0.8       0              f     1     −0.1 −0.7         −0.4
          u 0.7 1         0.9     0             u −0.1          1       0.1    −0.2
          c 0.8 0.9 1             0              c −0.7         0.1     1       0.5
          ⋆ 0       0     0       1              ⋆ −0.4 −0.2            0.5     1

Fig. 5. Correlation for the original review attributes in v (left) and for z (right) SR text
projection. Here f denotes either the observed (vfunny ) or sufficient reduction for (zfunny )
the number of funny votes per square root review age, similarly with u for useful votes and
c for cool votes, and ⋆ denotes the observed and SR for the number of review stars.


vote attributes are uncorrelated with star rating, but for the text projections
we see both negative (funny, useful) and positive (cool) association.
   The three 50–100 word reviews in Figure 6 provide further illustration.
A single review (bottom) of a historical site scores highest in funny and
useful attributes (and also in cool). The review is neither dry nor useless,
but we imagine its high vote count has been influenced by other factors, for
example, the page is heavily viewed or people who read reviews of national
parks are more likely to vote. In contrast, the two reviews identified through
SR projections as having the most funny or useful content appear to us
as more directly related to these concepts. The funny review, for a pizza
restaurant, is a fictional comedic story. The useful review contains a high
proportion of business photos (biz-photo), which the multinomial model has
identified as directly useful. The machine-learned text projections are able
to detect humor and helpfulness distinct from the other factors that lead to
increased user votes.

   4.4. Inverse regression for prediction. Multinomial-based SR projections
were originally motivated by Taddy (2013a) for their use in multinomial
inverse regression [MNIR; see also Taddy (2013c)]. Say viy , some element of
the attribute vector vi , is viewed as a “response” to be predicted for future
realizations. For example, in the original kaggle Yelp contest the goal was to
predict vi,funny , vi,useful , or vi,cool —the vote attributes. In such applications,
                                                                          P
an MNIR routine would use the SR projection into viy , ziy = j ϕ̂jy cij ,
to build a forward regression that predicts viy from ziy , vi,−y (attributes
omitting y), and mi .10 This p+1 dimensional regression replaces the d+p−1
dimensional one that would have been necessary to predict viy from vi,−y
and ci , the original text counts.
     The SR result that applies here is viy ⊥⊥ ci |ziy , vi,−y , mi . Since sufficiency for ziy
from the multinomial factorization is conditional upon mi , these document totals need to
be conditioned upon in forward regression.


16                                      M. TADDY


     Funniest 50–100 word review, by SR projection zfunny .
     Dear La Piazza al Forno: We need to talk. I do not quite know how to
     say this so I’m just going to come out with it. I’ve been seeing someone
     else. How long? About a year now. Am I in love? Yes. Was it you? It was.
     The day you decided to remove hoagies from your lunch menu, about a year
     ago, I’m sorry, but it really was you. . . and not me. Hey. . . wait. . . put down
     that pizza peel. . . try to stay calm. . . please? [Olive oil container whizzing
     past head] Please! Stop throwing shit at me. . . everyone breaks up on social
     media these days. . . or have not you heard? Wow, what a Bitch!

     Most useful 50–100 word review, by SR projection zuseful .
     We found Sprouts shortly after moving to town. There’s a nice selection
     of Groceries & Vitamins. It’s like a cheaper, smaller version of Whole
     Foods. [biz-photo] [biz-photo] We shop here at least once a week. I like
     their selection of Peppers. . . . I like my spicy food! [biz-photo][biz-photo][bizphoto] Their freshly made Pizza is not too bad either. [biz-photo] Overall,
     it’s a nice shopping experience for all of us. Return Factor—100%.

     Funniest and most useful 50–100 word review, as voted by Yelp users
     (votes normalized by square root of review age).
     I use to come down to Coolidge quite a bit and one of the cool things I
     use to do was come over here and visit the ruins. A great piece of Arizona
     history! Do you remember the Five C’s? Well, this is cotton country. The
     Park Rangers will tell you they do not really know how old the ruins are,
     but most guess at around 600 years plus. But thanks to a forward thinking
     US Government, the ruins are now protected by a 70 foot high shelter.
     Trust me, it comes in handy in July and August, the two months I seem
     to visit here most. LOL. I would also recommend a visit to the bookstore.
     It stocks a variety of First Nation history, as well as info on the area.
     http: // www. nps. gov/ cagr/ index. htm . While you are in Coolidge, I
     would recommend the Gallopin’ Goose for drinks or bar food, and Tag’s for
     dinner. Both are great!


Fig. 6. Illustration of the information contained in sufficient projections z. The top two
reviews are those, among all where m ∈ (50, 100), with highest SR projection scores into
the funny and useful attribute spaces. For comparison, we also show the single 50–100
word review with highest values for both vfunny and vuseful (recall that these are vote totals
per square root review age). Note that, since variance of z increases with m, high scoring
reviews tend to be longer. One can also, as in Taddy (2013a), divide the SR projections
by document length and work with normalized z/m. On this scale, the funniest review is
“Holy Mother of God” and the most useful review is “Ask for Nick!”


                   DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                                   17

                                          Table 2
 Yelp. Out-of-sample R2 in prediction for vote attributes (normalized by root review age)
in 5-fold CV. The top row shows a standard lasso regression from the vote attribute onto
 text and all nonvote attributes, while the bottom row holds results for MNIR followed by
 lasso regression from the vote attribute onto review length (mi ), nonvote attributes, and
                        the corresponding univariate SR projection

                            Forward regression                Average out-of-sample R2
                       Input variables         Dimension     funny     useful       cool

Standard lasso     Nonvote attributes, C         25,876       0.308     0.291       0.339
MNIR + lasso      Nonvote attributes, z, m       11,940       0.316     0.296       0.341


    Estimating an inverse regression in order to get at another forward regression may seem a strange use of resources. But there are a variety of
reasons to consider MNIR. Computationally, through either the techniques
of this article or the collapsing of Taddy (2013a), the multinomial regression
estimation can occur in distribution on many independent machines. This
is useful when the full count matrix C is too big to fit in memory. Another
reason to use MNIR is for statistical efficiency when d is big relative to n.
Assuming a multinomial distribution for ci |vi introduces information into
the estimation problem (a lessPgenerous term is “bias”). In particular, it
implies that each of the M = i mi counts are independent observations,
such that the sample size for learning Φ becomes M rather than n. That
is, estimation variance decreases with the number of words rather than the
number of documents [see Taddy (2013b)].
    As an illustration, Table 2 shows results for prediction of individual f/u/c
vote attributes, both through MNIR with lasso forward regression and for
a standard lasso onto the full text counts. That is, MNIR fits E[viy ] = β0 +
[vi,−f/u/c , mi , ziy ]′ β while the comparator fits E[viy ] = β0 + [vi,−f/u/c , ci ]′ β,
where vi,−f/u/c denotes all nonvote attributes. For MNIR each Φ̂ (hence, ziy )
is also estimated using only the training sample, and in both cases prediction
rules were selected via AICc minimization along the L1 regularization path.
We see that MNIR forward regression, replacing 13,938 covariates from ci
with just the two numbers zyi and mi , does not suffer against the full lasso
comparator (indeed, it is very slightly better in each case). Such performance
is typical of what we have observed in application.11 This is not evidence that
      In Taddy (2013a), the MNIR routines more significantly outperform lasso comparators in OOS prediction. However, the data sets used in that paper are both very small,
with M ≫ n. Thus, our statistical efficiency argument—that for MNIR estimation variance decreases with M instead of n—is working heavily in favor of MNIR. Here, even
though M > n, vocabulary size d is smaller than n and linear regression is already plenty
efficient.


18                                    M. TADDY

the text counts do not matter: each full lasso estimates at least 4000 terms
having nonzero coefficients. Rather, the multinomial model is a good enough
fit that the factorization results of (13) apply and all relevant information
is contained in the SR projection.12
   Note that the MNIR forward regression ignores projection from text onto
any other nonvote attributes. This is because those attributes are conditioned upon in forward regression. Indeed, Taddy (2013a, 2013b) argue that,
in prediction for a single variable, you only need fit the multinomial dependence between counts and that single variable. This yields SR projection
based on marginal association, which can work as well as that based on
partial association for simple predictions. The benefit of fitting models for
high-dimensional vi is that we are then able to interpret the resulting partial
effects and SR projections, as in Sections 4.2–4.3. It is also useful in more
structured prediction settings, as in the next section.

   4.5. Confounder adjustment in treatment effect estimation. In our final
application, we illustrate use of SR projections as convenient low-dimensional
controls in treatment effect estimation. The task here has a particular attribute, say t, whose effect on another, say y, you want to estimate. You
want to know what will happen to y if t changes independently from the
other attributes. Unfortunately, everything is collinear in the data and both
y and t could be correlated to other unobserved confounders. Your best option is to estimate the treatment effect—that of t on y—while controlling for
observable potential confounders. In text analysis, this includes controlling
for the text content itself.
   Consider estimating the effect of a user’s experience—the number of reviews that they have written—on their expected rating. That is, are experienced users more critical, perhaps because they have become more discerning? Or do they tend to give more positive reviews, perhaps because community norms encourage a high average rating? It is hard to imagine getting
firm evidence in either direction without running a randomized trial—we
will always be worried about the effect of an omitted confounder. However,
we can try our best and condition on available information. In particular,
we can condition on content to ask the question: even given the same review
message, would an experienced user give more or less stars than a newbie?
   The response attribute, viy , is star rating. The treatment, vit , is the log
number of reviews by the author (including the current review, so never less
than one). Results for estimation of the effect of vit on viy , conditioning on
different control variables, are detailed in Table 3. A naı̈ve estimate for the
     We have also found success applying nonlinear learning (e.g., trees) in forward regression after SR projection. Methods that are too expensive or unstable on the full text
work nicely on the reduced dimension subspace.


                    DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                                   19

                                          Table 3
Estimated effect “γ” of user experience (log number of reviews) on number of stars rated.
 Each corresponds to different levels of confounder adjustment. The effects are all AICc
  selected estimates along a γ = 10 (very near to L0 ) gamma lasso regularization path,
where all of the other regression coefficients were unpenalized. Thus, they are significant,
  in the sense that the AICc deems vit useful for predicting viy even after all variation
                        explained by confounders has been removed

                  Marginal Conditional on attributes only Adding and interacting text SR

Effect estimate    0.003                  0.015                          0.020


effect of experience on rating, estimated through the marginal regression
E[viy ] = β0 + vit γ, is a γ̂ = 0.003 increase in number of stars per extra unit
log review count. Use vi,−yt to denote all other attributes. Then an improved
estimate of the treatment effect is obtained by fitting E[viy ] = β0 + vit γ +
  ′
vi,−yt β, which yields the much larger γ̂ = 0.015.
    Finally, we would like to control for ci , the review content summarized
as word counts. It would also be nice to control for content interacting with
attributes since, for example, positive content for a restaurant might imply
a different star rating boost than it does for a bowling alley. Unfortunately,
interacting 13,938 dimensional ci with the 333 business categories yields almost 4.7 million regression coefficients. This is more controls than we have
observations. However, the SR projections offer a low-dimensional alternative. Write ziy and zit for the SR projections onto response and treatment,
respectively. Then sufficiency factorization implies
(14)                        viy , vit ⊥⊥ ci |ziy , zit , mi , vi,−yt .
That is, the joint distribution of treatment and control is independent of
the text given SR projection into each. This suggests we can control for
review content, and its interaction with business classification, simply by
adding to our conditioning set [ziy , zit , mi ] and its interaction with business
classification. The resulting regression, with around 13k control coefficients
instead of 4.7 million, yields the still larger treatment effect estimate γ̂ =
0.02.

   5. Discussion. Distributed estimation for multinomial regression allows
such models to be applied on a new scale, one that is limited only by the
number of machines you are able to procure. This is an important advance
not only for our motivating text analysis applications, but also for any other
setting of high-dimensional multinomial modeling. This includes any softmax classification model.
   One message of this paper has been that Poisson factorization enables fast
estimation of multinomial distributions. It has been pointed out to us that,
in unstructured data analysis, a Poisson seems little more arbitrary than


20                                       M. TADDY

a multinomial model. Equation (2) clarifies this issue: the only additional
assumption one makes by working with independent Poissons is that the
aggregate total, mi , is Poisson. We have attempted to mitigate the influence
of this assumption, but that is unnecessary if you consider the Poisson a fine
model in and of itself.
   Finally, we wish to emphasize the relative simplicity of this approach.
Although this article describes models for complex language systems, and
it may not seem to the reader that we are providing anything “simple,”
almost all of this material is just Poisson regression. We have used the
ideas of Taddy (2014) and the gamma lasso to fit these regressions, but any
generalized linear model estimator could have been applied. As implemented
in this article, there are only two tuning parameters in the entire system: the
gamma lasso weight γ, which can be safely fixed at zero (for lasso regression)
as a solid default; and the relative confounder-penalty divisor τ . Specification
of τ is a clearly subjective choice,13 but such subjectivity is inevitable in
any structural inference that does not involve a random or pseudo-random
experiment.
   Too often, social scientists faced with text data will jump to latent space
models (e.g., topic models) as the first step in their analysis. Unless the
phenomena that they’d like to measure is a dominant source of variation in
word choice, these latent topics will be mostly irrelevant. The same scientist
faced with more familiar response variables—such as money spent—would
likely have used regression modeling with a mix of observable covariates and
fixed or random effects, instead of trying to model any sort of latent space.
Thus, without wanting to claim that topic and related models are not useful
(they are very useful), we hope that this article will give social scientists the
option of using the same type of regression tools for text analysis that they
use successfully in their nontext research.

                         APPENDIX: MAPREDUCE DETAILS
   MapReduce (MR) is a recipe for analysis of massive data sets, designed
to work when the data itself is distributed: stored in many files on a network
of distinct machines. The most common platform for MR is Hadoop paired
with a distributed file-system (DFS) optimized for such operations (e.g.,
Hadoop DFS).
   A MapReduce routine has three main steps: map, partition, and reduce.
The partition is handled by Hadoop, such that we need worry only about
map and reduce. The map operation parses unstructured data into a special
format. For us, in a text mining example, the mapper program will take a
document as input, parse the text into tokens (e.g., words), and output lines
          Except for when you have enough data to identify the model with τ = ∞.


                      DISTRIBUTED MULTINOMIAL REGRESSION                   21

Algorithm 1 MapReduce DMR
Map: For each document, tokenize and count sums for each token. Save
the total counts mi along with attribute information vi . Output token
document|count.
Combine totals mi and attributes vi into a single table, say VM. This info
can be generated during map or extracted in earlier steps. Cache VM so it is
available to your reducers.
Reduce: For each token key “j,” obtain a regularization path for Poisson
regression of counts cij on attributes vi with µ̂i = log mi . Apply AICc to
select a segment of coefficients from this path, say ϕ̂j , and output nonzero
elements in sparse triplet format: word|attribute|phi.
Each reducer writes coefficients ϕ̂j of interest to file, and maintains a running total for SR projection, zi += c′i ϕ̂j , output as say Z.r for the rth
reducer. When all machines are done we aggregate Z.r to get the complete
projections.

of processed token counts: “token document|count.” The pre-tab item (our
token) is called a “key.” Hadoop’s sort facility uses these keys to send the
output of your mappers to machines for the next step, reducers, ensuring
that all instances of the same key (e.g., the same word) are grouped together at a single reducer. The reducer then executes some operation that
is independent-by-key, and the output is written to file (usually one file per
reducer).
    DMR fits nicely in the MR framework. Our map step tokenizes your
unstructured data and organizes the output by token keys. Reduce then
takes all observations on a single token and runs a Poisson log regression,
applying the gamma lasso with IC selection to obtain coefficient estimates.
This recipe is detailed in Algorithm 1.
    We have written this as a single MR algorithm, but other variations may
work better for your computing architecture. Our most common implementation uses Hadoop to execute the map on a large number of document
files, but replaces the regression reduce step with a simple write, to solid
state storage “midway” at the University of Chicago’s Research Computing Center, of token counts tabulated by observation. For example, given
64 reducer machines on AWS, the result is 64 text tables on midway, with
lines “word|doc|count,” each containing all nonzero counts for a subset
of the vocabulary of tokens. These files are small enough to fit in working
memory14 and can be analyzed on distinct compute nodes, each employing
       If not, use more reducers or split the files.


22                                    M. TADDY

another layer of parallelization in looping through Poisson regression for each
token. This scheme is able to take advantage of Hadoop for fast tokenization
of distributed data, and of high performance computing architecture (much
faster than, say, a virtual AWS instance) for each regression. It is a model
that should work well for the many statisticians who have access to computing grids designed for high throughput tasks more traditionally associated
with physics or chemistry.

                                   REFERENCES
Birch, M. W. (1963). Maximum likelihood in three-way contingency tables. J. Roy.
  Statist. Soc. Ser. B 25 220–233. MR0168065
Cook, R. D. (2007). Fisher lecture: Dimension reduction in regression. Statist. Sci. 22
  1–26. MR2408655
Dean, J. and Ghemawat, S. (2008). MapReduce: Simplified data processing on large
  clusters. Comm. ACM 51 107–113.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T. and Tibshirani, R. (2010). Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent. J. Stat. Softw. 33 1–22.
Gopalan, P., Hofman, J. M. and Blei, D. M. (2013). Scalable recommendation with
  Poisson factorization. Available at arXiv:1311.1704.
Hodges, J. L. Jr. and Le Cam, L. (1960). The Poisson approximation to the Poisson
  binomial distribution. Ann. Math. Statist. 31 737–740. MR0117812
Hurvich, C. M. and Tsai, C.-L. (1989). Regression and time series model selection in
  small samples. Biometrika 76 297–307. MR1016020
McDonald, D. R. (1980). On the Poisson approximation to the multinomial distribution.
  Canad. J. Statist. 8 115–118. MR0595721
Palmgren, J. (1981). The Fisher information matrix for log linear models arguing conditionally on observed explanatory variables. Biometrika 68 563–566. MR0626420
Taddy, M. (2013a). Multinomial inverse regression for text analysis. J. Amer. Statist.
  Assoc. 108 755–770. MR3174658
Taddy, M. (2013b). Rejoinder: Efficiency and structure in MNIR. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc.
  108 772–774. MR3174661
Taddy, M. (2013c). Measuring political sentiment on Twitter: Factor optimal design for
  multinomial inverse regression. Technometrics 55 415–425. MR3176547
Taddy, M. (2014). One-step estimator paths for concave regularization. Available at
  arXiv:
  1308.5623.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. J. Roy. Statist.
  Soc. Ser. B 58 267–288. MR1379242
Venables, W. N. and Ripley, B. D. (2002). Modern Applied Statistics with S, 4th ed.
  Springer, New York.

                                                          University of Chicago
                                                            Booth School of Business
                                                          5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                          Chicago, Illinois 60637
                                                          USA
                                                          E-mail: taddy@chicagobooth.edu