E XPLORING P OLARIZATION OF U SERS B EHAVIOR ON T WITTER
                                              D URING THE 2019 S OUTH A MERICAN P ROTESTS

                                                                                               A P REPRINT


                                                      Ramon Villa-Cox                      Helen (Shuxuan) Zeng                 Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh
                                                   Carnegie Mellon University             Carnegie Mellon University              Carnegie Mellon University
                                                 rvillaco@andrew.cmu.edu               shuxuanz@andrew.cmu.edu                    akhudabu@cs.cmu.edu
arXiv:2104.05611v1 [cs.SI] 5 Apr 2021


                                                                                           Kathleen M. Carley
                                                                                         Carnegie Mellon University
                                                                                    kathleen.carley@cs.cmu.edu


                                                                                               April 13, 2021

                                                                                               A BSTRACT
                                                   Research across different disciplines has documented the expanding polarization in social media.
                                                   However, much of it focused on the US political system or its culturally controversial topics. In this
                                                   work, we explore polarization on Twitter in a different context, namely the protest that paralyzed
                                                   several countries in the South American region in 2019. By leveraging users’ endorsement of
                                                   politicians’ tweets and hashtag campaigns with defined stances towards the protest (for or against),
                                                   we construct a weakly labeled stance dataset with millions of users. We explore polarization in two
                                                   related dimensions: language and news consumption patterns. In terms of linguistic polarization, we
                                                   apply recent insights that leveraged machine translation methods, showing that the two communities
                                                   speak consistently “different” languages, mainly along ideological lines (e.g., fascist translates to
                                                   communist). Our results indicate that this recently-proposed methodology is also informative in
                                                   different languages and contexts than originally applied. In terms of news consumption patterns, we
                                                   cluster news agencies based on homogeneity of their user bases and quantify the observed polarization
                                                   in its consumption. We find empirical evidence of the “filter bubble” phenomenon during the event,
                                                   as we not only show that the user bases are homogeneous in terms of stance, but the probability that a
                                                   user transitions from media of different clusters is low.

                                        Keywords Linguistic Polarization · Filter Bubbles · 2019 South American Protests

                                        1       Introduction
                                        The 2019 South American Protest were a series of protests that shocked the region at the end of 2019. These protests
                                        started in Ecuador and were followed by Chile, Bolivia and Colombia and effectively paralyzed the countries for months.
                                        With the exception of Bolivia, the protest resulted from populist movements seeking to resist austerity measures being
                                        imposed in each country and demanding more government spending in social programs. In Bolivia, they were response
                                        to an alleged electoral fraud undertaken by the government in favor of the president who was seeking reelection. These
                                        protests also had in common a massive online presence and the reported involvement of international and regional
                                        actors that sought to influence their evolution. These include international news agencies like RT en Español, funded in
                                        part by the Russian government, TeleSUR and NTN24, funded in part by the Venezuelan government, that were more
                                        critical of local governments (except for Bolivia) and provided more favorable coverage of the protesters. In contrast,
                                        local news agencies tended to be more critical of them and favorable towards the government1 .
                                            Lara Jakes, “As Protests in South America Surged, So Did Russian Trolls on Twitter, U.S. Finds” New York Times, January 19
                                        2020, accessed December 19 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/19/us/politics/south-america-russian-twitter.html


           Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


In this work, we seek to explore the polarization that was observed during the online Twitter discussions throughout the
protests. The analysis focuses on two dimensions: Polarization in language and in news consumption patterns. For
this purpose, we first separate users by their stance towards the protests and government of each country. We quantify
linguistic polarization by training word embeddings on the corpora based on the tweets of users of each stance. We then
estimated a translation matrix between both embeddings and explored systematic differences in a translated word and
its closest neighbors in the target language. This approach has been recently applied to interpret political polarization in
the viewerships of US cable news networks. Our work contrasts with this recent research [1] along the following three
main dimensions: (1) different political context (2019 South American Protest instead of US political polarization); (2)
different language (Spanish instead of English); and (3) different social media platform (Twitter instead of YouTube).
We find a clear polarization in language, mainly manifested along ideological, political or protest-related lines (e.g.,
Socialism in one group is discussed in similar context to Communism in the other and police in the same way as
vandals). We also show that this methodology can be used to mine knowledge, as we find that local political leaders
from the protest in one country translate to their counterparts in another country.
In terms of polarization in news consumption, we focus on how confirmation bias manifests in the consumption of
news articles based on user stances. The current fractionalized way of consuming news facilitated by social media
not only helps to gain a quicker overview current events, but also can lead to confirmation bias [2]. For this reason,
it is important to explore how it may lead to the manipulation of public opinion by actors with devious motives. By
clustering news media based on the homogeneity of their user bases, we find that agencies are clustered geographically
and ideologically. Moreover, we find strong evidence of the polarization in users’ news consumption patterns and of the
presence of “filter bubbles”. These can have pervasive effects on public discourse and political literacy.
This work falls in the emerging field of social cybersecurity which is concerned with the study of disinformation, hate
speech and extremism online [3]. It contributes to the study of polarization in South American politics and linguistic
polarization in Spanish during charged political events.

2     Literature Review
2.1   Polarization in language

Polarization in political topics has been widely studied in academic literature, focusing especially on partisanship in
US politics. The existing research covers aspects like climate change [4, 5], gun control/rights [6], Supreme Court
confirmations [7], economic decisions [8], congressional votes [9], polarization in media [10], etc. A recent vein of
research has focused in leveraging the knowledge extracted by unsupervised language models to assess polarization.
Related work in this area includes: using language models to explore religious polarization in India [11], the study
of the presence of human bias in word embedding in social media [12, 13] and a recent work of word embedding
de-biasing [14, 15]. Recently, an approach has been offered to interpret polarization through machine translation [1].
This work presented a quantifiable framework with a novel assumption that sub-communities consuming different US
cable news networks speak in different languages. With this assumption, [1] presented a method to quantify similarities
(and dissimilarities) between large-scale text data. As we apply their methodology to assess polarization in language,
we defer further explanation of it to Section 4. Our use of this framework extends previous results in three key ways:
we show that this method is generarizable to (1) different social media platforms (the machine translation-based method
has only been applied to YouTube data primarily consisting of user-generated texts on news videos [1, 16]); (2) a
language different from English; (3) and a completely different socio-political context of linguistic polarization during
South-American protests.

2.2   Polarization in news consumption

A review of recent work that explored the effect of confirmation bias on news consumption, notes that most has
centered its cognitive dimension, while the social aspects have hardly been investigated [17]. There is a need to explore
the effects of being exposed to contravening information on in-group interactions, which is the focus of the present
work. Most echo chambers encountered empirically are a result of social media practices that exhibit polarized content
engagement, rather than exposure [2]. However, there has been contradictory evidence in this regard, as studies have
found limited evidence of challenge avoidance in online settings [18, 19, 20] while consistent evidence of reinforcement
seeking. On a similar note, a review of numerous studies on Facebook showed that observed polarization is driven more
by selective exposure resulting from confirmation bias than by filter bubbles or echo chambers [21]. In the context of
the spread of misinformation, polarization has been identified as an important driver for its diffusion. This has been
observed in the context of disinformation campaigns around the release of popular Marvel movies [22, 23] and in the
diffusion of scientific, conspiracy theory and satiric Facebook articles [24]. In the later study, confirmation bias was
identified as a primary driver for this polarization as it lead to homogeneous clusters of media consumption. This is
not specific to Facebook, as the same relationship between polarization and confirmation bias has been observed on
             Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


Figure 1: User by User response network for A) Bolivia and B) Ecuador. For each panel, the left figure shows the
ego-networks of labeled users, including inconsistent users, while the right figure considers consistently labeled users.
Users with consistent stances against government are colored red, pro users are colored blue and inconsistent users are
colored white.

YouTube in a similar context [25]. In this work, we extend this observation to a different social media platform, namely
Twitter.


3     Data Description
The dataset was constructed by collecting Twitter data for: Ecuador, Chile, Bolivia and Colombia. More than 500
hashtags and terms were used to collect tweets for the different countries. A special effort was taken to collect
conversations around antagonistic positions, by including hashtags that were used by different groups (for and against
the different governments). This resulted in over 100 million tweets from 15+ million users. Table 6 presents other
descriptive statistics from the data collected for the different countries.

                                    Collection Period (in 2019)     Number of Tweets (Millions)
                    Bolivia         October 15 to November 24                     23.5
                    Chile           October 10 to November 24                     59.6
                    Colombia       November 10 to December 24                     20.4
                    Ecuador         September 25 to October 24                    19.1

                      Table 1: Collection period and number of tweets collected for each country.


3.1     Determining user stances

We constructed a weakly supervised dataset of user stances towards the government and protests that occurred in each
country. In order to lend robustness to our dataset construction process, labels were assigned based on two different
methods: Hashtag usage and politician retweeting behavior. Our process required determining the stance of a small set
of hashtags and politicians. In both cases, the labeling process was carried out by two native Spanish speakers who
were familiarized with the events of each protest, based on a sample of their tweets during the protests and in case of
disagreements, a consensus label was determined. Labels for each user are assigned based on the probability that they
post a tweet with a given stance (based on the defined category). We only considered users that posted at least 10 tweets
in our dataset (including retweets).

3.1.1    Hashtag usage
A base set of Hashtags were classified into either pro, anti or neutral to the protests or to the government, based on a
sample of the tweets that used them. A hashtag was assigned a stance if it was exclusively used in tweets charged with
the corresponding stance. This resulted in 120+ pro and 300 anti-government tags (the remainder being either neutral or
not a hashtag). This set was expanded by classifying the most important co-occurring hashtags, following the same
methodology. This resulted in 599 pro and 1400 anti-government tags and 1170 pro and 480 anti-protests tags. We
found that users that engaged in promoting the protests, sometimes also tweeted things in support of the Venezuelan
            Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


government that were not directly related to the events of each country. For this reason, the same methodology was
used to classify the pro and anti-Venezuela hashtags, resulting in 377 and 108, respectively.
Weak-stance labels were assigned to tweets if they only contain a hashtag from a given stance, if this was not the
case the tweet was deemed inconsistent. To assign a stance to a User, we used a probability threshold of 95%. This
implies that at least 95% of the tweets of a given users were assigned the same stance, either on their tweets or their
user descriptions. To further validate the stance of the users, stances towards the government and the protests were
combined by assigning a consistent stance in favor of the government if a user was assigned a pro stance towards the
government and an antagonistic position towards the protests. The opposite was done for the antagonistic stances
towards the government. This produced a label distribution that was highly skewed towards anti-government stances.

3.1.2    Politician retweeting behavior
We labeled 700 of the major politicians across the countries for the stance towards the government during the protests.
Similar to the methodology described before, users were assigned a stance if they consistently retweeted politicians
with the same stance. However, in this case we use a cutoff consistency probability of 90%. The final user stance was
determined by combining the labels obtained by both methodologies, allowing us to validate the stances assigned to the
users. There was a 20% overlap between the labels produced, obtaining inconsistencies that varied from 13-17% for
each of the countries. This provides a measure of the robustness of the labels assigned by our procedure. In total, we
were able to assign a weak-stance label users responsible for approximately 20% of the tweets in the dataset.

                                              Bolivia (%)       Chile (%)     Colombia (%)         Ecuador (%)
            Consistent Anti-Government             42              76               70                 66
            Consistent Pro-Government              37              12               22                 23
            Inconsistent                            2              1                 3                  2
            Other                                  19              11                5                  8

           Table 2: Distribution of users based on stance towards the government for the collected countries.

The final distribution of weakly-labeled users and the number of original tweets (not including retweets) posted by them
is presented in Table 3.

                                                            Bolivia         Chile    Colombia        Ecuador
                                               Users      56 146         208 632       85 923          65 079
              Consistent Anti-Government
                                               Tweets    1 483 202      5 671 474    1 598 679        954 508
                                               Users        48 794       32 052          26 455       23 463
              Consistent Pro-Government
                                               Tweets       755 734     2 165 908        927 769      432 544

             Table 3: Number of Weakly-Labeled Users and their original tweets (not including retweets)


3.2     Exploring community interaction

We explored community interaction between pro and anti-government movement through the user by user response
network. Two users are linked in this network if they replied each other either by direct responses or quotes. Figure 1
presents the ego-network of the labeled users (including unlabeled users) and the subgraph that only includes users that
were labeled consistently for the country of Bolivia and Ecuador. As observed, among the consistently labeled users,
most communications occur between users of the same stance and the network clearly clusters based on the user’s
stance towards the government. However, when we consider unlabeled and inconsistently labeled users, we see that the
network becomes more integrated, with unlabeled users serving as bridges between the communities. Similar effects
are observed with the other countries.
Further, we explore the stance of the users defined before toward the Venezuelan government. As shown in Figure 2, a
significant percentage of users that favored the Bolivian government (ideological ally of the Venezuelan regime) also
favored the Venezuelan government. However, a much smaller share of the users that were against the government
Bolivian government engaged in tweets that revealed their stance towards the Venezuelan government. A similar pattern
is observed for Ecuador (and all other countries not shown in the figure). This suggest that there is a more active
            Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


Figure 2: User by User response network of consistently labeled users for A) Bolivia and B) Ecuador. Nodes are colored
red if they support the Venezuelan government, blue if they were against and white if no label is assigned based on the
methodology described.


presence of Venezuelan accounts promoting the Bolivian government, or the protests in the case of Ecuador and other
countries studied, an observation that is corroborated by their news consumption patterns, discussed below.


4    Linguistic Polarization

We explored linguistic polarization among both communities by applying the methodology developed in [1]. Their work
was applied to English YouTube comments in the context of polarization in US cable news networks viewerships, but as
we show in this work, the methodology is more generalizable and robust to differences in colloquialisms. In [1], the
authors presented a machine translation based framework to quantify the differences between large scale social-media
discussion data sets. This framework assumes that two sub-communities (e.g., the sub-community favoring the protest
and the sub-community opposing the protest) are speaking in two different languages (say, Lpro and Lagainst ) and
obtains single-word translations using a well-known machine translation algorithm [26]. Since Lpro and Lagainst are
both in fact Spanish, ideally, any word w in Lpro should translate to itself in Lagainst . However, when a word w1 in one
language translates to a different word w2 in another, it indicates w1 and w2 are used in similar contexts across these
two languages signalling (possible) disagreement. These disagreed pairs present a quantifiable measure to compute
differences between large scale corpora as greater the number of disagreed pairs the farther two sub-communities are.
We now present a formal description of this framework. Let our goal be to compute the similarity between two
languages, Lsource and Ltarget , with vocabularies Vsource and Vtarget , respectively. Let translate(w)Lsource →Ltarget
denote a single word translation of w ∈ Vsource from Lsource to Ltarget . The similarity measure between two languages
along a given translation direction computes the fraction of words in Vsource that translates to itself, i.e.,
                                      Σw∈Vsource I(translate(w)Lsource →Ltarget =w)
Similarity(Lsource , Ltarget ) =                         |Vsource |
                                                                                    . The indicator function returns 1 if the
word translates to itself and 0 otherwise. The larger the value of Similarity (Lsource , Ltarget ), the greater is the similarity
between a language pair.
We constructed Lpro and Lagainst by combining all the main tweets by a user of a given stance (this includes tweets not
related to the protests). We made sure to include a retweeted tweet only once (instead of the millions of times it might
have been retweeted). For each of constructed corpora, we trained a 100-dimensional FastText embedding [27], with
basic pre-processing that included removing URLs, mentions and punctuation. Next, we translate the top 10k words in
one language to the other and examine disparities. The translation scheme learns a transformation matrix T between the
two embeddings, such that the product with the embedding of the source produces the target. We followed the same
experimental protocols presented in [1]: (1) we used stop-words as anchors for the translation as these are the most
likely to maintain their meaning across the different groups; and (2) given the imbalanced size of the two corpora, we
               Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


sub-sampled the majority community (against the government) to match the size of the smallest community across the
countries (Ecuador’s Pro-Government community). This guaranties a fair comparison between the two communities.
Due to space constraints, in Table 4 we provide several notable examples of the polarized language observed between
the two communities only for Bolivia and Ecuador (the results are consistent across all the countries studied). We find
a polarization in language, mainly manifested along ideological, political and protest-related lines. Terms related to
left-leaning ideologies in one community tend to be discussed in similar contexts as right-leaning terms (e.g. Socialism
translates to Communism); terms related to the protests and protesters are discussed in similar context as terms related
to law and order (an informal term for police translates to vandal). Importantly, we find that the motivations for the
protests translate to each other. For example, in the case of Ecuador, 8832 translates to derogate which was one of
the calls of the protests movements (a similar pattern is shown for Bolivia with the "overthrow" term). In the case of
Bolivia, overthrowing (accusation made by Evo Morales against the protesters) translates to defeat (which refers to the
electoral victory the opposition claimed to have achieved). Finally, opposition leaders are discussed in similar context
as government representatives.


                                                                  Lpro                    Lagainst
                              Country       Theme
                                                              (translation)             (translation)
                                                              Comunismo                Neoliberalismo
                                                              (comunism)               (neoliberalism)
                                                               Socialismo                Capitalismo
                                           Idiological
                                                               (socialism)               (capitalism)
                                                                Populista                 Autoritario
                                                                (populist)              (authoritarian)
                                                                 Chapas                   Vandalos
                                                           (police -informal-)            (vandals)
                              Ecuador                         Protestantes                 Policias
                                             Protest
                                                              (protesters)                 (police)
                                                                   883                     Derogar
                                                            (name of policy)             (derogate)
                                                                 Indigena                Insurgencia
                                                              (Indigenous)              (insurgency)
                                                                Morenista                 Correista
                                            Political
                                                           (president suporter)     (supporter of Correa)
                                                                 Borrego                  Correista
                                                                  (sheep)           (supporter of Correa)
                                                               Comunismo                   Facismo
                                                              (communism)                 (fascism)
                                                                Socialista               Capitalista
                                           Idiological
                                                                (socialist)              (capitalist)
                                                                Populista                  Fascista
                                                                (populist)                  (facist)
                                                                 Golpista                 Fascista
                                                              (coup plotter)              (fascist)
                              Bolivia                            Derrocar                 Derrotar
                                             Protest
                                                               (overthrow)                (defeat)
                                                                 Molotov                Lacrimogena
                                                                (molotov)                (tear gas)
                                                               evomorales                 Criminal
                                                              (ex-president)             (criminal)
                                                                 Masista                 Maleante
                                            Political
                                                          (opposition supporter)        (malefactor)
                                                                 Masistas                Golpistas
                                                         (opposition supporters)       (coup plotter)
                    Table 4: Notable instances of linguistic polarization by topic for Ecuador and Bolivia.
       This refers to the decree 883 which proposed austerity measures and started the protests in the country
            Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


                                                                        Ltarget (Lagainst )
                                                       Bolivia        Chile       Colombia       Ecuador
                                           Bolivia    49.9 (0.6)        -               -           -
                                            Chile         -         63.1 (0.6)          -           -
                     Lsource (Lpro )
                                          Colombia        -             -         57.1 (0.6)        -
                                          Ecuador         -             -               -       56.0 (1.3)
                                                                         Ltarget (Lpro )
                                                       Bolivia        Chile       Colombia       Ecuador
                                           Bolivia        -         40.1 (0.9) 37.0 (0.6)       38.6 (0.7)
                                            Chile     40.1 (0.9)        -         58.7 (0.9)    52.6 (1.4)
                     Lsource (Lpro )
                                          Colombia    37.0 (0.6)    58.7 (0.9)          -       49.9 (0.9)
                                          Ecuador     38.6 (0.7)    52.6 (1.4) 49.9 (0.9)           -
                                                                         Ltarget (Lagainst )
                                                        Bolivia        Chile       Colombia       Ecuador
                                            Bolivia        -         46.1 (0.8) 43.4 (1.2)       47.2 (0.6)
                                             Chile     46.1 (0.8)        -         58.7 (0.9)    52.6 (1.4)
                    Lsource (Lagainst )
                                           Colombia    43.4 (1.2)    58.7 (0.9)          -       49.9 (0.9)
                                           Ecuador     47.2 (0.6)    52.6 (1.4) 49.9 (0.9)           -

Table 5: Pairwise similarity (in percentage points) between languages computed for: Top) pro and against protest
communities in different countries, Middle) pro-protest communities in different countries, and Bottom) against-protest
communities in different countries. All similarity metrics are constructed with corpus of approximately the same size.
Standard deviations are presented in parenthesis, most statistics are more than 2 deviations away from each other. The
evaluation set, is computed by concatenating the corpora and taking the top 5K words ranked by frequency.


The mean and standard deviation of the pairwise similarity between languages in pro and against protest communities
within countries are shown in the top section of Table 5. The sub-sampling process was repeated 6 different times, given
the randomness of this process. As we can observe, the largest linguistic polarization was observed in Bolivia, this
difference being significant at a 95% threshold. Moreover, to test the robustness of the methodology to differences in
dialects, we apply it to compare stances between the countries. The middle and bottom sections of Table 5 include the
pairwise similarity of languages for pro- and against-government communities between countries. First, notice that the
similarities between the countries are significantly lower in the pro-government case, as this community is considerably
smaller than its counterpart (which is expected because corpus size is one of the most important contributing factors
to ensure the quality of word embedding). However, even with this caveat in mind, the language similarity is lower
for pairs that contrast Bolivia to other countries. This is consistent with the fact that Bolivia is the only country
which has a left-leaning government and hence right-leaning protesters. Moreover, even with the added noise of local
colloquialisms, we are still able to recover the ideological polarization between protest movements, when compared to
Bolivia (“neoliberalism” still translates to “communism” or “socialist” to “nazi”). These differences do not exist when
comparing protests movements with similar ideological motivations (e.g. “socialist” in Ecuador translates to “socialist”
in Chile). Importantly, we can use this methodology to mine knowledge from the corpora, as we find that local political
leaders from the protest in one country translate to their counterparts in the other country (e.g. “Correa” in Ecuador
translates to “Petro” in Colombia – an opposition leader).

5    Polarization in News Consumption
We first constructed a data set of the regional and local news agencies operating in each country. For the purpose
of exploring regional influence campaigns on the protests, we included agencies from Venezuela and Russia that
predominately operate in the region. The number of news agencies from each country is shown below in Table 6. For
each of them we collected, their name, Twitter handle and the URL for their main domain. However, news articles
identified in our data set cover topics ranging from the protests to sports. When studying the polarization of news
consumption the political event, it was important to first filter out the tweets which are irrelevant to the protests. It is not
obvious if a tweet from news media is relevant to the ongoing protests in each country or not, but many tweets in our
data set contain the URL of an article that they reference. For this reason, we determined the relevance to the protest of
a small set of the 900 most tweeted URLs in our dataset for any of the countries studied. We complemented this dataset
with an additional set of URLs labeled by extracting subsection metadata from them. If the subsection referenced sports,
culture or technology, the URL was labeled as irrelevant to the protests. Then, we assigned the URL label to any tweet
            Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


that used it. The final sample distribution are presented in Table 7. We note that even though we are able to assign a
label to more than 100k tweets, most of them contained duplicated text (as news media tend to tweet the same thing
multiple times). The classification was done with the unduplicated dataset.

                                                 Country          # Agencies
                                                 Bolivia             52
                                                 Chile               95
                                                 Colombia            69
                                                 Ecuador             99
                                                 Regional*           10
                                                 Russia               2
                                                 Venezuela           57

Table 6: Number of news agencies in each country. *The regional category includes regional Venezuelan and Russian
media among others.

We built a CNN text classifier [28] using 300 dimensional FastText embeddings trained on the combined datasets (both
by stance and country) used to analyze the language polarization. We used 100 filters on 3 layers with filter sizes 3, 4
and 5 and a dropout rate of 50%. We achieved an accuracy and F1-score of 92% in a held-out test set.

                              Category         # of Tweets        # of Tweets (Unduplicated)
                              Relevant            78,318                       7,177
                              Not Relevant        53,671                       8,156

                                        Table 7: Distribution of the labeled tweets

After predicting the labels of tweets (relevant or irrelavant to the protests), we obtain a dataset of 1,024,166 relevant and
675,496 irrelevant tweets. The distribution of the data set is shown in Table 8. For our analysis below, we filter out the
irrelevant tweets and focus only on the tweets that are relevant to the protests.


                                        Category         # of Tweets      # of Users
                                        Relevant           1,024,166       276,754
                                        Not Relevant        675,496        247,324

                           Table 8: Distribution of the tweets with predicted labels and users


Community detection among News Agencies After filtering out the irrelevant tweets, we explore the community
of news agencies based on the homogeneity of their user bases. We apply Louvain community detection to cluster
the news agencies. Formally, a bipartite graph is a triple G = (A, B, E) where A = {ai |i = 1, 2, ..., nA } and
B = {bj |j = 1, 2, ..., nB } are two disjoint sets of vertices, and E is a set of edges where they only exist between set A
and B. The bipartite graph G could be described as a matrix M for which
                                            
                                              1, if there is an edge between ai and bj
                                   Mi,j =
                                              0, otherwise.
As shown in Figure 3, media are divided into three clusters: a) major local media (blue), b) regional Russian and
Venezuelan media (red), including local left-leaning media, and c) local Venezuela media (gray). Note that agencies
are not only clustered geographically, but also ideologically as the local media cluster includes the major media
organizations in each country, which, as mentioned before, were reportedly more likely to support the local governments
(with the exception of Bolivia where the situation is reversed). It is noteworthy that there exists a cluster of local
Venezuelan media, which confirms the observation presented before that there was an important presence of Venezuelan
accounts active during the protests in each of the countries. The clustering results confirms our hypothesis that media
           Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


with similar stances are more likely to share homogeneous users’ base providing evidence for of “filter bubbles” in
users’ news consumption behavior. In what remains of the analysis, we do not consider the local Venezuelan cluster.


Figure 3: The cluster of the news agencies. The colors indicate different communities, where a) blue are local media; b)
red are regional Russian and Venezuelan Media; and c) green colors are local Venezuelan media. Edges between dots
represent common users are shared by the news media on the two ends.


5.1   Quantifying the polarization

We next measure the the diversity in the user bases of the news agencies in the region to evaluate the polarization
in news consumption by users with different stances. Figure 4 shows the distribution of the ratio of retweets from
pro-government users in Bolivia, Chile, Colombia and Ecuador for the regional Russian and Venezuelan news media.
For regional left-leaning media, most of the retweets come from anti-government users in Chile, Colombia and Ecuador.
Whereas in Bolivia, most retweets of these news agencies come from pro-government users. This is consistent with
their political orientation and their documented support of the Bolivian government [29], while Ecuador, Chile and
Colombia have more right-leaning governments. The results not only provide evidence of polarization, but also for
the “filter bubble" hypothesis of information diffusion, where users are more likely to retweet news aligning with their
stances.
 We further explore if the observed level of polarization described before is only accounted by the asymmetries in the
user stances observed in each country. For this purpose, we compute the relative entropy for each news agency in the
clusters of local and regional Russian and Venezuelan media. For each news agency n, its relative entropy is defined as
follows:
                                                       ppro                     1 − ppro
                                 H(n) = −ppro ∗ log         − (1 − ppro ) ∗ log                                      (1)
                                                       gpro                     1 − gpro
where ppro is the ratio of retweets for news media n from pro-government users and gpro is the overall ratio of
pro-government users in that country. The relative entropy H(n) evaluates how ppro differs from gpro - the lower the
value of H(n), the more disproportional the level of polarization is with respect to the asymmetries observed in the
stance distribution. The maximum possible value 0 of H(n) is obtain when a news organization’s user base matches the
the stance distribution for the country. Figure 5 shows the distribution of relative entropy for news media in the clusters
of local media and regional Russian, Venezuelan media for Bolivia, Chile, Colombia and Ecuador. We observe that
for all countries, regional media from Russia and Venezuela are disproportionately polarized. Moreover, in the case
of Bolivia, we observe the highest level of relative polarization, an observation that is consistent with the language
polarization levels described in the previous section.
          Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


Figure 4: Histograms of ratio of retweets from pro-government users for regional Russian and Venezuelan media: for
country Bolivia (up left), Chile (up right), Colombia (bottom left) and Ecuador (bottom right)


Figure 5: Distribution of relative entropy for local (blue cluster) and regional Russian and Venezuelan media (red
cluster) in Bolivia (up left), Chile (up right), Colombia (bottom left) and Ecuador (bottom right).
           Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


5.2   Assessing confirmation bias through news media transitions

We finally address the way users navigate among the different clusters of news media. We adapt the methodology
developed in Koutra et al. 2015[30], where they examined the transition behavior of users when browsing websites
related to the topic of gun rights/control. Specifically, we seek insights about how the political orientation of news
media influences the type of news agencies that users browse or retweet next, in the context of a polarising topic like
the protests. We explore the type of news media tweets or articles that users are more likely to retweet after consuming
news supporting or objecting the protest. For each user, we represent her retweeting history as a Markov chain of the
cluster of agencies the retweeted news come from. Then, we describe the distribution of the transition probabilities
by an n-state transition matrix Pn , with elements pij = Prob(Xt+1 = j|Xt = i). We note that the row-wise sums are
equal to 1. Specifically, state 0 represents when the user retweets news from local news media, state 1 from regional
Russian and Venezuelan media. The transition matrix for Bolivia, Chile, Colombia and Ecuador are shown in Table 9.
To make sense of the underlying trends of this matrix, we employ mobility indices that have been widely used in
economics and sociology.

                            Country                         Local media     Regional media
                                         Local media            94.15%           5.85%
                            Bolivia
                                         Regional media          2.79%          97.21%
                                         Local media            66.68%          33.32%
                            Chile
                                         Regional media          21.2%           78.8%
                                         Local media            91.75%           8.25%
                            Colombia
                                         Regional media         17.96%          82.04%
                                         Local media          83.27%          16.73%
                            Ecuador
                                         Regional media        7.85 %         92.15%
                         Table 9: Transition matrix for Bolivia, Chile, Colombia and Ecuador


We employ the Summary Mobility Indices, which describe the direction of the mobility:
                             Pn
     • Immobility Ratio: IR = i=1 pii /n
                                     P
     • Moving Up (Left): MU (ML) = i<j pij /n
                                         P
     • Moving Down (Right): MD (MR) = i>j pij /n

where n is the number of states. As mentioned previously, the cluster of Russian and Venezuelan media is left-leaning
media. We therefore call the index of moving up (from local media to Russian, Venezuelan media) as moving left
(politically), and the index of moving down as moving right (politically).

                                       Country      IR          ML        MR
                                       Bolivia     95.68% 2.93%      1.40%
                                       Chile       72.74% 16.66% 10.6%
                                       Colombia 86.90% 4.13%         8.98%
                                       Ecuador     87.72% 8.37%      3.93%
                                        Table 10: Summary Mobility Indices


The Summary Mobility Indices for different countries are included in Table 10. We note that the majority transitions
are to the same state, which indicates users tend to stay in the community (bubble) where the stances of the information
align with their own. The likelihood of transitioning out of a user’s community (bubble) is generally low. In this
regard, the transition matrices provide evidence for the presence of “filter bubbles” in the midst of the protests event
and confirmation bias in the way users choose to share content. Moreover, the observed polarization levels in news
transitions are consistent with what was described for the language polarization in the last section; with Chile showing
the lowest level of polarization and Bolivia the highest, and Colombia and Ecuador showing similar levels. In addition,
we note that, with the exception of Colombia, higher percentage of transitions occur in the direction moving to the left
(politically), with ML > MR, which suggests in the three countries it would be more difficult for users with left stances
to consume news on their right (politically) than the other way around.
           Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


6   Discussion
In this work we explored polarization in user behavior, based on their stance towards the government during the 2019
South American protests. We focused on polarization in language and in news media consumption. We find that user
discussion, based on responses, clearly clusters according to the stance of the users. Moreover, there is an important
presence of accounts that promote the Venezuelan government and are active in the discussions supporting the protests
(or in the case of Bolivia, supports the government). In terms of the language used by each of the communities, we find
a clear polarization, mainly manifested along ideological, political and protest-related lines. This pattern is maintained
across all countries. We also show that we can mine knowledge from the corpora, as local political leaders from
the protest in one country translate to their counterparts in the other country. In addition, we find strong evidence
of polarization in news consumption and information diffusion by users, consistent with their stances towards the
government. The news media in our data set clearly clusters with the political stances of their content. We find consistent
evidence of filter bubbles in news consumption on Twitter, as users tend to stay in the community of news media
that shares information they are more like to agree with. But there is a tendency for users to transit into consuming
left-leaning news. Moreover, we show the important role that regional Russian and Venezuela news outlets like RT en
Español and TeleSUR, played in the social media discussion of the protests throughout the region. This shows how
effective these outlets have been in gathering an audience of left-leaning users in the region, an initiative that has been
identified by other studies of these networks [29]. Finally, we see that along both dimensions of polarization explored,
we find consistent results, with Chile showing the lowest level of polarization and Bolivia the highest, and Colombia
and Ecuador showing similar levels.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Knight Foundation and the Office of Naval Research grant N000141712675.
Additional support was provided by the Center for Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational Systems
(CASOS) and the Center for Informed Democracy and Social Cybersecurity (IDeaS). Ramon Villa-Cox is sponsored
in part by Secretaría de Educación Superior, Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación (SENESCYT), Ecuador. The views
and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the
official policies, either expressed or implied, of SENESCYT, the Knight Foundation, Office of Naval Research or the
U.S. government.

References
 [1] Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh, Rupak Sarkar, Mark S. Kamlet, and Tom M. Mitchell. We don’t speak the same
     language: Interpreting polarization through machine translation. In The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, AAAI 2021, page To Appear. AAAI Press, 2021.
 [2] R. Kelly Garrett. The “echo chamber” distraction: Disinformation campaigns are the problem, not audience
     fragmentation. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 6(4):370 – 376, 2017.
 [3] Kathleen M Carley. Social cybersecurity: an emerging science. Computational and Mathematical Organization
     Theory, 26(4):365–381, 2020.
 [4] Dana R. Fisher, Joseph Waggle, and Philip Leifeld. Where does political polarization come from? locating
     polarization within the us climate change debate. American Behavioral Scientist, 57(1):70–92, 2013.
 [5] Matthew Baldwin and Joris Lammers. Past-focused environmental comparisons promote proenvironmental
     outcomes for conservatives. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(52):14953–14957, 2016.
 [6] Dorottya Demszky, Nikhil Garg, Rob Voigt, James Zou, Jesse Shapiro, Matthew Gentzkow, and Dan Jurafsky.
     Analyzing polarization in social media: Method and application to tweets on 21 mass shootings. In Jill Burstein,
     Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio, editors, Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
     the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis,
     MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 2970–3005. Association for Computational
     Linguistics, 2019.
 [7] Kareem Darwish. Quantifying polarization on twitter: the kavanaugh nomination. CoRR, abs/2001.02125, 2020.
 [8] C McConnell, Y Margalit, N Malhotra, and M Levendusky. Research: Political polarization is changing how
     americans work and shop. Harvard Business Review, 2017.
 [9] Keith T Poole and Howard. The polarization of american politics. The journal of politics, 46(4):1061– 1079,
     1984.
           Exploring Polarization of Users Behavior on Twitter During the 2019 South American ProtestsA P REPRINT


[10] Markus Prior. Media and political polarization. Annual Review of Political Science, 16:101–127, 2013.
[11] Shriphani Palakodety, Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh, and Jaime G. Carbonell. Mining insights from large-scale
     corpora using fine-tuned language models. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth European Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence (ECAI-20), page pages 1890–1897, 2020.
[12] Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind Narayanan. Semantics derived automatically from language corpora
     contain human-like biases. Science, 356(6334):183–186, 2017.
[13] Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. Word embeddings quantify 100 years of gender
     and ethnic stereotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(16):E3635–E3644, 2018.
[14] Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. Man is to computer
     programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In Advances in neural information
     processing systems, page pages 4349–4357, 2016.
[15] Thomas Manzini, Lim Yao Chong, Alan W. Black, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Black is to criminal as caucasian is to
     police: Detecting and removing multiclass bias in word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
     the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
     1(16):615–621, 2019.
[16] Ashiqur R. KhudaBukhsh, Rupak Sarkar, Mark S. Kamlet, and Tom M. Mitchell. Fringe news networks: Dynamics
     of US news viewership following the 2020 presidential election. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.10112, 2021.
[17] Rich Ling. Confirmation bias in the era of mobile news consumption: The social and psychological dimensions.
     Digital Journalism, pages 1–9, 2020.
[18] Paul DiMaggio and Kyoko Sato. Does the internet balkanize political attention?: A test of the sunstein theory. In
     Annual meeting of the American Sociological Association, Atlanta, 2003.
[19] Seth Flaxman, Sharad Goel, and Justin M Rao. Filter bubbles, echo chambers, and online news consumption.
     Public opinion quarterly, 80(S1):298–320, 2016.
[20] Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M Shapiro. Ideological segregation online and offline. The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 126(4):1799–1839, 2011.
[21] Dominic Spohr. Fake news and ideological polarization: Filter bubbles and selective exposure on social media.
     Business Information Review, 34(3):150–160, 2017.
[22] Matthew Babcock, Ramon Villa-Cox, and Kathleen M Carley. Pretending positive, pushing false: Comparing
     captain marvel misinformation campaigns. In Disinformation, Misinformation, and Fake News in Social Media,
     pages 83–94. Springer, 2020.
[23] Matthew Babcock, Ramon Alfonso Villa Cox, and Sumeet Kumar. Diffusion of pro-and anti-false information
     tweets: the black panther movie case. Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory, 25(1):72–84, 2019.
[24] Michela Del Vicario, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Fabio Petroni, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli, H Eugene
     Stanley, and Walter Quattrociocchi. The spreading of misinformation online. Proceedings of the National Academy
     of Sciences, 113(3):554–559, 2016.
[25] Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Michela Del Vicario, Michelangelo Puliga, Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli,
     Brian Uzzi, and Walter Quattrociocchi. Users polarization on facebook and youtube. PloS one, 11(8):e0159641,
     2016.
[26] Samuel L. Smith, David H. P. Turban, Steven Hamblin, and Nils Y. Hammerla. Offline bilingual word vectors,
     orthogonal transformations and the inverted softmax. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations,
     ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings, 2017.
[27] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. Enriching word vectors with subword
     information. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 5:135–146, 2017.
[28] Yoon Kim. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5882, 2014.
[29] Liliana Savage, Claudia Flores-Saviaga, and Saiph Savage. Unraveling the operations in latin america of the
     russian state-controlled international television network (rt). White Paper.
[30] Danai Koutra, Paul N. Bennett, and Eric Horvitz. Events and controversies: Influences of a shocking news event
     on information seeking. CoRR, abs/1405.1486, 2014.