Media Slant is Contagious⋆
                                           Philine Widmer1 , Clémentine Abed Meraim2 , Sergio Galletta2 , Elliott Ash2
                                                                                    Paris School of Economics
                                                                                            ETH Zürich
arXiv:2202.07269v4 [econ.GN] 18 Feb 2025


                                           Abstract

                                           This paper examines the diffusion of media slant. We document the influence of Fox News
                                           Channel (FNC) on the partisan slant of local newspapers in the U.S. over the years 19952008. We measure the political slant of local newspapers by scaling the news article texts
                                           to Republicans’ and Democrats’ speeches in Congress. Using channel positioning as an
                                           instrument for viewership, we find that higher FNC viewership causes local newspapers
                                           to adopt more right-wing slant. The effect emerges gradually, only several years after
                                           FNC’s introduction, mirroring the channel’s growing influence on voting behavior. A
                                           main driver of the shift in newspaper slant appears to be a change in local political
                                           preferences.

                                           JEL codes: L82, C53, D72, D23, O33, Z13.
                                           Keywords: Media slant, text as data, local news markets.


                                              ⋆
                                               We thank for helpful comments and suggestions Julia Cagé, Mirko Draca, Ruben Durante, Claudio
                                           Ferraz, Roland Hodler, Eunji Kim, Michael Knaus, Ro’ee Levy, Josh McCrain, Giovanni Prarolo, Giacomo Ponzetto, Pia Raffler, Jim Snyder, Dmitriy Vorobyev, David Yang, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, our
                                           anonymous referees, and seminar and conference participants at the Harvard Political Economy Seminar, Econometric Society World Congress, Bologna Workshop on Elections, Democracy, and Populism,
                                           Bolzano Workshop on Political Economy, Bergamo Advances in Economics Workshop, SIEP Conference at the University of L’Aquila, University of St.Gallen Economics Seminar, and Zurich Text as Data
                                           Workshop. Romina Jafarian and Matteo Pinna provided excellent research assistance. First version:
                                           December 2020.
                                             Corresponding author: Philine Widmer.
                                             Email addresses: philine.widmer@psemail.eu (Philine Widmer), clementine.abedmeraim@gess.ethz.ch
                                           (Clémentine Abed Meraim), sergio.galletta@gess.ethz.ch (Sergio Galletta), ashe@ethz.ch (Elliott Ash).
1. Introduction
       It is well-documented that media outlets frame content in a way that is favorable
to a particular political party or ideological perspective (e.g., Groseclose and Milyo,
2005; Harmon and Muenchen, 2009; Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2010; Puglisi and Snyder,
2011). These biases in reporting can impact public opinion (e.g., Chiang and Knight,
2011; Djourelova, 2023). In particular, there is extensive evidence that higher exposure
to Fox News Channel boosts Republican vote shares and other conservative interests
(DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007; Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017; Ash and Galletta, 2023;
Ash et al., 2024b).
       However, whether media slant is contagious – that is, whether biased news messaging
spreads to other outlets – remains largely unanswered. This issue is policy-relevant
because media regulation in democracies typically aims at cultivating a diverse news
market where consumers have an unrestricted choice among independent news sources.
After all, diverse news sources only translate into diverse reporting if those sources are
relatively independent in their newsmaking.
       This paper studies such influence across media outlets in the context of U.S. cable TV
news networks and local newspapers. Our focus is Fox News Channel (FNC), which has
a well-documented conservative slant relative to other cable networks such as MSNBC
and CNN. We ask whether higher FNC viewership among a local newspaper’s readership
leads to a change in the partisan slant of that newspaper’s content.
       The first step in answering this question is measuring the slant of local newspaper
content. The local news corpus comprises 15.1 million article snippets from 718 local
newspapers in the United States covering the period from 2005 through 2008. Alongside
the newspaper articles, we have 200,000 speeches from the U.S. Congressional Record
over the same period.1
       We use our parallel corpora to construct a measure of local media slant, comparing
the language in local newspaper articles to the language used in Congressional speeches.
Methodologically, we follow the penalized multinomial model of speech proposed by
Gentzkow et al. (2019b). We train a model based on the Congressional speeches to
     To investigate the mechanisms, we also build an auxiliary corpus comprising newspaper articles
from 1995 through 2004. There are an additional 31.1 million articles and almost 500,000 speeches from
these earlier years. We consider this corpus as auxiliary because we only have data for fewer newspaper
titles in those periods.
assess whether a given body of text more closely resembles the language used by Republicans rather than Democrats. We validate our model and find that Republican phrases
emphasize right-wing priorities like tax reductions, fiscal conservatism, abortion issues,
and immigration,2 while Democratic phrases reflect left-wing priorities like social welfare, education, criticism of the Iraq War, and gun control. We then use the text model
fitted in the Congressional Record to position each newspaper article on a left-right
spectrum based on its text content. Higher (positive) values of that measure imply a
Republican-leaning article, while lower (negative) values imply a Democrat-leaning article. We examine the most predictive phrases in newspaper articles to verify that our
model, trained on Congressional speech patterns, effectively identifies political language
in news coverage. The article-level measure is then aggregated to obtain a left-right
slant measure at the newspaper level. For our main results, we calculate the share of
Republican-leaning articles for each newspaper, and we show robustness to other aggregation rules.
       Our main research question is whether newspaper content becomes more right-wing
in response to higher FNC viewership in a newspaper’s market (i.e., county). For causal
estimates, we exploit exogenous variation in cable news exposure across counties coming
from variation in the channel numbering of FNC. As first shown in Martin and Yurukoglu
(2017), FNC’s channel position is exogenous conditional on a set of geographical, demographic, and channel system-related controls (see also Ash and Galletta, 2023). We
document the instrument’s first-stage relevance and provide evidence supporting the exogeneity assumption in our context. The FNC channel position is uncorrelated with
historical (pre-FNC) newspaper slant and other local characteristics that predict viewership or slant.
       We find that media slant is contagious: Higher local FNC viewership makes the
slant of local newspapers more right-wing. According to our estimates, a one-standarddeviation increase in FNC viewership due to channel positioning increases right-wing
newspaper slant by one-half a standard deviation. That effect magnitude corresponds
to roughly one-tenth the Republican-Democrat difference in Congressional speeches and
one-quarter the FNC-MSNBC difference in their news shows. Our results are robust
to various checks, for example, regarding the slant-measure construction, instrument
    For example, the expression “illegal alien” emerges as predictive of Republican language (Djourelova,
2023).
construction, and circulation weighting.
       We then explore potential mechanisms for the Fox News effect on local newspapers.
First, we explore a persuasion effect, i.e., FNC changing local policy preferences. We
show that right-ward shifts of newspaper slant coincide – temporally and geographically
– with FNC’s persuasion of voters (DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007; Martin and Yurukoglu,
2017; Ash et al., 2024b), who are presumably the readers of local newspapers. Regarding
the timing of effects, newspaper slant changes several years after the introduction of FNC,
mirroring the channel’s growing influence on Republican vote shares over the same time.
In terms of geography, we estimate heterogeneous treatment effects of FNC following
the method of Athey et al. (2019) and show that counties with larger voting responses
to FNC also have larger newspaper-slant responses. Persuasion could occur through
FNC influencing the supply side (journalists, editors, and owners adopting more rightwing positions), the demand side (readers developing preferences for Republican-slanted
content), or both. While we cannot cleanly disentangle supply from demand factors,
we interpret the evidence as being particularly consistent with demand-side persuasion.
FNC pushes the readership to the right, and local newspapers respond with more rightwing slant.3
       As a second possible mechanism, we examine cost-saving – that is, local newspapers
borrowing content from FNC rather than producing it themselves. The nationally oriented cable channels primarily cover news at the national or international level. Hence,
this mechanism involves a potential trade-off if readers prefer local content (which is
expensive to produce) over non-local content. Then, the local newspapers would borrow
content as long as the savings outweigh the effect of losing some readers (see Martin and
McCrain, 2019). To evaluate whether direct borrowing is a key mechanism, we look for
an FNC effect on the slant of local news topics – e.g., events at local schools, hospitals,
and government offices. Such local reporting constitutes the majority of the news articles
in our sample. Since FNC does not feature any content on these topics, a right-ward
shift in local reporting would preclude cost-savings being a key driver of the main results. Indeed, we find a similar right-ward shift of FNC for local-news topics. Thus,
while newspapers likely directly borrow FNC content at times, our evidence suggests it
    While journalists could be persuaded, too, it is unlikely that FNC’s persuasion of voters would
run through local newspapers only. Ash and Poyker (2023) make a similar point for judges: cable
news influences criminal sentencing through voters and judicial elections rather than persuading judges
directly.
is not a substantial contributor to the overall FNC effect on newspaper slant.
    As a third and final mechanism, we discuss whether FNC’s effect on local newspapers
could work through competitive pressures in the local news market. Several suggestive
analyses provide no evidence that competition drives the observed rightward shift in
newspaper slant (e.g., we find no FNC effect on local newspaper circulation).
    These findings add to the literature in economics and political science on biased
media (e.g., Ashworth and Shotts, 2010; Prat, 2018).4 This literature provides extensive evidence that mass media shift election outcomes and readers’ political preferences.
First, Gentzkow et al. (2011) and Drago et al. (2014) report that the opening of local
newspapers boosts voter turnout. Chiang and Knight (2011) show that a newspaper
endorsement for a presidential candidate shifts voting intentions in favor of this candidate. Djourelova (2023) shows, for the case of immigration and border security, that
the language used in newspapers can causally shift readers’ policy preferences. Beyond
the United States, Enikolopov et al. (2011) find that Russian voters with access to an
independent television station are more supportive of anti-Putin parties.5
    Regarding FNC in particular, there is a body of research documenting its political
and societal impact – beyond shifting votes (DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007; Martin and
Yurukoglu, 2017; Ash et al., 2024b; Li and Martin, 2022). It has also been shown that
cable news can affect voter knowledge (Hopkins and Ladd, 2014; Schroeder and Stone,
2015), fiscal policy decisions (Ash and Galletta, 2023), as well as behaviors during the
COVID-19 pandemic (Bursztyn et al., 2022; Ash et al., 2024a; Simonov et al., 2022). We
add to this work by looking at the influence of partisan narratives using text analysis,
studying the spillover effects on other news outlets.
    Our main contribution to the debate on media bias lies in showing how news media
outlets are interconnected. Recent contributions on cross-media influence document the
influence of social media on traditional media (Cagé et al., 2020a; Hatte et al., 2021),
and that news outlets copy-paste from each other extensively (Cagé et al., 2020b). We
document explicitly how media bias from one media organization can causally spill over
to other media organizations. Hence, our work identifies an additional potential channel
     For surveys on the empirical and theoretical literature, see Puglisi and Snyder (2015) and Gentzkow
et al. (2015), respectively. See also Stroemberg (2015).
     Other prominent contributions on the mass media’s persuasive effects around the world include
Adena et al. (2015), DellaVigna et al. (2014), and Yanagizawa-Drott (2014). Prat and Stroemberg
(2013) and Stroemberg (2015) provide surveys on the mass media’ political effects.
through which partisan media affects political and social outcomes.
   The diffusion of national partisan priorities into local news is important because local
newspapers are pivotal for citizen engagement and political accountability (e.g., Snyder
and Strömberg, 2010). George and Waldfogel (2006) find that the market entry of a
national media outlet (in their case, the New York Times) causes local outlets to focus
more on local coverage. Martin and McCrain (2019) show that the acquisition of U.S.
local TV stations by the national conglomerate Sinclair leads to an increased share of
national as opposed to local content. Further, Mastrorocco and Ornaghi (2024) document that these acquisitions by Sinclair reduce the local crime coverage and subsequently
lower crime clearance rates. Angelucci et al. (2024) demonstrate that the introduction
of television in the United States negatively impacted local newspapers’ readership and
advertising revenues, leading these newspapers to reduce their overall content, particularly local news, which in turn increased political alignment between congressional and
presidential elections. We contribute to these debates by analyzing how higher exposure
to slanted national cable news changes local slant. Hence, our work adds to recent concerns about lower social cohesion when the role of local media as a moderating force is
eroded (e.g., Djourelova et al., 2024; Darr et al., 2018).
   Methodologically, our approach combines natural language processing (NLP), machine learning, and causal inference (see Gentzkow et al. 2019a and Ash and Hansen
2022 for overviews of text-data-based work in economics). Regarding text-as-data approaches to measuring partisanship, the most related work is Gentzkow and Shapiro
(2010), showing a correlation in local news slant and local partisan preferences (see also
Gentzkow et al., 2019b).
   More broadly, our work contributes to the long-lasting debate on the importance of
(un)biased media in democratic politics.


2. Data
   Our analyses combine text data with structured, county-level demographics and cable channel system information. Our text data comes from local newspaper articles and
speeches in the Congressional record. The main observation period (2005-2008) is given
by data availability, as we only have Nielsen viewership data for 2005-2008. In addition,
we only have newspaper articles up until 2008. To run placebo checks and better understand the mechanisms behind our results, we also build slant measures for other periods
between 1995 and 2008. In the following, we describe the sources of these different data
types and their roles in the empirical analysis.

Local newspaper articles. The starting point is a corpus of local newspaper articles.
Our source is the news aggregation site NewsLibrary, from which we obtain the headlines
and article texts for a sample of local U.S. newspapers for 1995-2008.6 We programmatically read through the documents and extract the newspaper name, headline, article
text, and publication date (for an example article, see Appendix Figure A.1). The corpus contains 46.2 million articles from 718 unique sources over the period 1995 through
2008. The main analysis for 2005-2008 uses 15.1 million articles. Appendix A provides
more information on the sample.
       For our analyses, we remove articles related to routine announcements, which include
births, deaths, obituaries, and property notices. We remove those conservatively, using
a dictionary with unambiguous terms like “death notice”. Appendix B.8 describes the
filtering, and Appendix C.6 demonstrates robustness to not dropping those announcements.

Congressional speeches. To quantify the local newspaper articles’ slant, we need
a reference corpus on which we can build a slant model. For this, we use speeches
from the digitized U.S. Congressional Record published by the General Printing Office
(Gennaro and Ash, 2022). We collect about 670,000 speeches delivered by Republicans
and Democrats (excluding Independents) for 1995–2008, with about 183,000 for the
main-analysis period (2005-2008). See Appendix Table B.2 for additional information.

Newspaper-level circulation data. We match each local newspaper outlet with
its primary county based on the newspaper name and the geographical information
provided by NewsLibrary (e.g., The Call (Woonsocket, RI) or the Albany DemocratHerald (OR)), the U.S. Newspaper Directory, or manual web searches. We then matched
each newspaper to the associated total circulation numbers (as of 2004) reported by
Gentzkow et al. (2014).
    Due to access limits from NewsLibrary, the available article text is capped at the first 80 words.
This means that for longer articles, our texts only include the first 80 words. Full articles – available
on a pay-per-piece basis – were prohibitively expensive given our coverage in time and space.
Channel positions and viewership. From Nielsen, we have yearly data on channel
positions and ratings for Fox News Channel (FNC) and MSNBC for the years 2005-2008.
These are the same data used, for example, by Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) and Ash
and Galletta (2023). First, we have the channel lineup for all U.S. broadcast operators
and the respective areas served. Second, we have the viewership measure called ratings,
which is proportional to the average number of minutes spent watching a channel per
household. The channel lineup and viewership data come at the zipcode level, which we
aggregate to the county level as the average across zipcodes weighted by the number of
Nielsen survey respondents in the zipcode. After computing these values by county-year,
we then collapse to the county level by averaging within county across 2005-2008.

Other demographic covariates. Finally, we have additional covariates, beginning
with a rich set of demographics from the 2000 and 2010 censuses (see Appendix Table
A.2). For demographics, zipcode-level data are aggregated to the county level by averaging with weighting by zipcode population. We also use Republican vote shares from
1996 and 2008, obtained from Ash et al. (2024b).


3. Measuring Media Slant
   This section describes how we construct the main outcome variable in our regressions:
a text-based measure of political slant in local newspapers. We aim to scale the texts
of newspaper articles by their similarity to Republican (right-wing) and Democrat (leftwing) congressional speeches. To this end, we adapt the method of Gentzkow et al.
(2019b).
   Let N be the set of congressional speeches indexed by n. We build a model to
predict the partisanship, Speech_Partisanshipn , for each congressional speech. Positive
values indicate a more Republican-leaning speech, while negative values indicate a more
Democratic-leaning speech. Afterward, we will use the fitted model to label newspaper
articles as resembling more closely Democrat or Republican speeches.

3.1. Text Pre-Processing and Featurization
   First, we preprocess newspaper articles and congressional speeches. As noted by
previous work on supervised learning with political speech (e.g., Denny and Spirling,
2018; Peterson and Spirling, 2018), the specific choices of pre-processing and featurization are not that critical and can be done for computational and interpretive convenience. Here, the preprocessing includes normalizing to lowercase, removing stopwords
and non-informative elements (e.g., punctuation and formatting), tokenizing the texts,
and stemming the tokens. We then form bigrams (two-word phrases) from the stemmed
tokens. Following previous work, we remove any bigrams that are mostly associated
with congressional procedure, such as “time question” (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2010;
Gentzkow et al., 2019b; Gennaro and Ash, 2022). Appendix B.1 provides more details.
       The starting point for the vocabulary is all bigrams that appear in both the speech
corpus and the newspaper corpus. Further, we drop rare bigrams that would not be
informative of partisanship.7 Let V by the final vocabulary of 14,224 bigrams.

3.2. Congressional Slant Model Estimation
       Our method for scaling slant with Congressional speeches is based on the penalized
multinomial model of text by Gentzkow et al. (2019b). The multinomial inverse regression approach comes from Taddy (2013) and Taddy (2015), with the penalized estimator
approach coming from Taddy (2017) and Gentzkow et al. (2019b). A similar approach
to ours is taken by Cagé et al. (2024), who apply this estimator to scale left/right slant
in campaign manifestos of French parliamentary candidates. Our innovation is to take a
fitted model from one corpus (the speeches) to another corpus (the newspapers), similar
to the cross-domain approach from Osnabrügge et al. (2021).
       Formally, we assume that cbn , the count of bigram b in speech n, follows a multinomial
distribution of the form
                                         cbn ∼ MN(qbn , tn )

where tn is the total number of bigrams in speech n, and qbn is the probability of observing
bigram b in speech n. The probability of speech n using bigram b is given by

                                               exp(αb + ϕb Kn )
                                  qbn = P
                                            b′ ∈V exp(αb′ + ϕb′ Kn )
    We remove infrequent bigrams for efficient computation (in line with, e.g., Gentzkow et al., 2019b,
or Cagé et al., 2024).: To be included, a bigram must appear in at least 0.01% of both Republican
and Democrat speeches. Further, it must appear in at least 0.1% of Republican speeches or 0.1% of
Democrat speeches. We impose that bigrams must be in the newspaper corpus to ensure they capture
broader political discourse in the media. See Appendix B.2 for additional details on the vocabulary
construction.
where Kn is a binary indicator for party affiliation: Kn = 1 for Republican speeches
and Kn = 0 for Democratic speeches. The parameter ϕb quantifies the strength of the
association between usage of bigram b and party affiliation, with more positive values
reflecting a relative preference for b among Republicans and more negative values a
relative preference among Democrats.
       To estimate the parameters αb and ϕb , we deploy a distributed multinomial regression
(Gentzkow et al., 2019b). By approximating the multinomial likelihood with a Poisson
distribution for cbn , we derive the negative log-likelihood for bigram b as:

                                     N
                                     X
                     ℓ(αb , ϕb ) =         [mn exp(αb + ϕb Kn ) − cbn (αb + ϕb Kn )]
                                     n=1


N is the total number of speeches in the dataset. To address overfitting, a lasso (L1)
regularization term is added to the training objective. The penalized estimator is

                               (α̂b , ϕ̂b ) = arg min [ℓ(αb , ϕb ) + λ|ϕb |)]

where λ > 0 calibrates the strength of regularization. Following Gentzkow et al. (2019b),
we choose the value of λ that minimizes a Bayesian information criterion.8
       The slant estimator is fitted separately for the various time periods in the data that
will play a role in our empirical analysis. The main model uses speeches from 20052008. The historical samples are 1995–1997, 1998–2000, and 2001–2004. These models
are used, respectively, to score the slant of news articles for the same time period (see
Appendix B.4).
       The fitted model provides a set of partisan coefficients ϕ̂b for each bigram b. High
values for ϕ̂b indicate right-wing bigrams and low values indicate left-wing. Figure 1
presents a wordcloud of the most Republican (red) and Democrat (blue) bigrams for
the main 2005-2008 sample, where the font size reflects the magnitude of the partisan
coefficient ϕ̂b . The results are intuitive. Republican discourse is focused on fiscal and
social conservative priorities. Key bigrams like “tax break,” “death tax,” “margin tax,”
and “control spend” reflect the Republican emphasis on tax reduction and fiscal restraint.
    Given by BIC = −2ℓ(αb , ϕb ) + log(N ) ∗ df, where df is the degrees-of-freedom term, as described in
Zou et al. (2007). This corresponds to the number of parameters with non-zero values after regularization, excluding α̂b , as outlined in Taddy (2015).
               Figure 1: Democrat (Blue) and Republican (Red) Bigrams, 2005-2008


Notes: The word cloud shows the most partisan bigrams for Democrats (blue) and Republicans (red)
across newspapers during the period 2005–2008. We restrict the computation to the top 1,000 most
partisan bigrams. Font size represents the relative partisanship of each bigram, with larger text indicating greater partisanship. Procedural bigrams have been filtered out.
Social conservative priorities are evident in terms like “partial birth,” “unborn children,”
and “human embryo,” highlighting abortion-related issues. Meanwhile, Democratic discourse covers social welfare and international affairs. Bigrams like “lowincom work,” “cut
wealthi,” and “school facil” suggest a focus on social programs, economic equality, and
education funding. Terms like “redeploy troop,” “occup iraq,” and “invad iraq” reflect
Democratic criticism of Republican foreign policy, particularly regarding the Iraq War.
The presence of “gun safeti” and “gun violenc” indicates Democratic emphasis on firearm
regulation.
       Appendix Figure B.1 plots the most partisan bigrams but with the font size proportional to the bigram frequency in newspapers. This figure illustrates that in the context
of the newspapers, Republican slant is mostly around conservative fiscal policy, immigration (e.g., “illegal alien”), and abortion. Democrat slant centers around social and
health policy issues.

3.3. Measuring Slant in Newspapers
       The next step is to use the model estimates ϕ̂b for each bigram to compute the
newspaper articles’ partisanship score. The partisanship of article m in newspaper i is
the weighted sum of the coefficients across the bigrams appearing in the article:
                                                           X
                            Article_Partisanshipmi =             fbmi · ϕ̂b                       (1)
                                                           b∈V


where fbmi is the relative frequency of bigram b in article m.9
       Positive values of Article_Partisanshipmi indicate that an article leans Republican.
Negative values imply it is Democrat-leaning. Scores near zero reflect mixed or neutral language. To focus on the presence of right-wing slant, we convert the continuous
score to a discrete classifier for “is right wing”. Specifically, we define Repmi = 1 for
Article_Partisanshipmi > 0 and Repmi = 0 otherwise.
       Finally, for our regressions, we aggregate up to the newspaper level. The main
outcome for newspaper i is the share of articles classified as Republican:

                                                      M
                                              1 X
                                     Slanti =        Repmi                                        (2)
                                              M mi=1
    Specifically, the relative frequency is given by the count of bigram b in speech n, divided by the
total number of bigrams in speech n from the vocabulary V .
for all articles mi produced by newspaper i. In the remainder of the paper, when
referring to the newspapers’ “slant,” we mean Slanti as defined in Equation 2 unless
otherwise specified. For robustness, we compute alternative slant measures: (i) the
share of Republican articles among all partisan articles (i.e., excluding articles with
Article_Partisanshipmi = 0), (ii) the newspaper-level average of the partisanship scores
described by Article_Partisanshipmi in equation 1, and (iii) the share of Democrat articles (i.e., the same as in Equation 2 but for Democrat articles). We discuss the results
for these additional measures in the robustness checks (Section 5.1 and Appendix C.6).
Appendices B.5 to B.7 further describe and validate the slant measure.

3.4. Additional Text Variables
       As part of the analysis below, we use several other variables constructed from the
text. First, we have some news article controls to capture the non-ideological style
features. These include the unique-to-total word count ratio, average word length, and
average article length.
       Next, when studying the mechanisms in Section 6, we need to classify news articles
as either referring to local news topics or higher-level news (i.e., national or international
news). To do this, we first label 100,000 random newspaper article snippets as either
“local” or “non-local” using GPT-3.5-Turbo. Then, we train a supervised binary classifier
on these labeled data points. The classifier is then used to label all newspaper articles
as local vs. non-local. Appendix B.9 explains this procedure.


4. Econometric Framework

4.1. Instrumental Variables Specification
       The main outcome variable is Slanti , the slant of newspaper i circulating in county
j (see Section 3.3 above). Higher values of Slanti indicate that a larger share of articles
from newspaper i resemble Republican speeches. We are interested in the causal effect
of local FNC viewership on slant. Hence, our main treatment variable, Viewershipj ,
is the county-level FNC viewership.10 We specify the relationship between slant and
       In the robustness checks, we also look at FNC relative to MSNBC channel viewership, see Appendix
C.8.
viewership linearly:

                      Slanti = αs + θViewershipj + X1j β1 + X2i β2 + ϵi                             (3)

where θ is the causal parameter of interest. The regression includes state fixed effects
(αs ), a vector of county-level controls, X1j , and a vector of newspaper-level controls,
X2i . The error term is ϵi . The exact covariate set X1j varies across specifications. It
always includes demographic controls and can additionally contain channel controls: the
share of households with potential access to FNC, CNN, or MSNBC and the position
of MSNBC and CNN.11 Appendix Table A.2 provides details. Newspaper-level controls
X2i capture generic language controls (unique-to-total word count ratio, average word
length, average article length).
       Estimating Equation (3) using OLS produces biased θ estimates. For a discussion
of the OLS estimates, see Appendix C.3. We use an instrumental variable to produce
causal estimates. Following Martin and Yurukoglu (2017), we use cable network channel
positioning to construct an instrument Positionj that affects Viewershipj but is otherwise unrelated to any factors affecting Slanti . As first shown by Martin and Yurukoglu
(2017) and since used in various papers (e.g., Ash and Galletta, 2023), there is arbitrary
variation in cable channel positioning across U.S. localities. This channel positioning
leads to exogenous shifts in viewership because television watchers spend more time on
networks with lower channel positions. Thus, we instrument viewership using channel
position.12 The first stage is:


                    Viewershipj = αs + δPositionj + X1j β1 + X2i β2 + ηi                            (4)

       Combining the first stage (4) and Equation (3), we can obtain causal estimates for
the local average treatment effect θ using two-stage least squares (2SLS). To facilitate
the coefficient interpretation, we standardize the instrument, endogenous regressor, and
outcome by dividing the original values by the standard deviations. Standard errors are
      These controls follow, as closely as possible, the channel controls used by Martin and Yurukoglu
(2017). Some of Martin and Yurukoglu’s controls are rendered moot with our county-level observations
since they do not vary much across counties in 2005-2008. This applies to the total number of channels
and the number of broadcast channels on the system.
      We also report results for the MSNBC channel position, which comes with similar quasi-experimental
variation, see Appendix C.5.
                                                Figure 2: First Stage: Fox News Viewership and Channel Position
     Standardized Fox News Channel Viewership
                         2         2.5


                                                                                                        Coef = -.19*** (.05)
                                                                                                             N = 718
                                                                                                         K-P F-Stat = 14.7
   1          1.5


                                                2                3               4               5                         6
                                                            Standardized Fox News Channel Position

Notes: Binned scatterplots (equally sized bins) of the standardized FNC viewership (vertical axis)
against the standardized FNC channel position (horizontal axis). Cross-section with newspaper-level
observations weighted by newspaper circulation. We include state fixed effects, demographic controls,
and channel controls (see Table A.2 for the specific controls). Next to the axes, we show the distributions of the underlying variables in light gray. The reported coefficients and standard errors are from
OLS estimates of the first stage with clustering by state, along with the observation count and the
Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic.


clustered by state or, for robustness checks, by census division or without clustering.
Our baseline regression weights newspapers by circulation, with robustness checks on
weighting reported in Appendix C.7.

4.2. Instrument First Stage and Validity
      Figure 2 visualizes the first-stage relation between the FNC channel position (horizontal axis) and FNC viewership (vertical axis) in each newspaper’s county. The figure
includes state fixed effects, channel controls, and demographic controls. Consistent with
the logic of the instrument and the previous literature, the relationship is significantly
negative. A one-standard-deviation decrease in FNC’s channel position (11 positions
in the lineup) increases the channel’s viewership by about 19% of a standard deviation (roughly 0.05 rating points). Our first-stage coefficient means that decreasing the
FNC channel position by one standard deviation or 11 positions increases the channel’s
viewership by roughly 23 minutes per month.13
       Appendix Table C.1 shows coefficients and standard errors in tabular format. The
table’s upper panel shows different specifications for the association of the FNC position
and FNC viewership (adding different fixed effects and controls). Census division fixed
effects (which group several states) in columns (1) to (3) and state fixed effects in columns
(4) to (6) lead to similar estimates. We thus concentrate on the discussion of columns
with state fixed effects. In line with Martin and Yurukoglu (2017), we find a strong first
stage once we include demographic controls (moving from column 4 to 5) and especially
when additionally introducing channel controls (moving from column 5 to 6). Column
(6) is our preferred specification (also shown in Figure 2). Our instrument is relevant,
with a Kleibergen-Paap cluster-robust first-stage F-statistic of 15. 14
       Beyond relevance, we assume monotonicity, that the exclusion restriction holds, and
exogeneity. Monotonicity appears plausible in our context (the channel position influences TV viewership in the same direction for all counties, and thus, higher positions do
not systematically increase viewership). For the exclusion restriction, we assume that the
channel position affects local newspapers only through its effect on cable news viewership. Exogeneity requires that Position j is uncorrelated with ϵi (conditional on controls,
see Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017. That is, the channel position is not endogenously selected with county-specific preferences for conservative or liberal news reporting. The
main identification problem is that channel positions could be allocated endogenously in
response to local factors correlated with conservative news messaging.
       Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) provide a detailed discussion and several checks supporting the exogeneity assumption. Their qualitative research highlights that channel
positions have an important arbitrary, historical component with significant inertia and
path dependence. Quantitatively, they document that the instrument is uncorrelated
with Republican vote shares before the introduction of FNC. They also show that the
instrument is unrelated to demographic characteristics that predict policy preferences or
    A one-tenth of a rating point equals 45 minutes per month of (additional) viewership per household.
    For completeness, Appendix C.1 includes complementary analyses of the first stage with MSNBC
viewership and positioning.
news channel viewership. Ash and Galletta (2023) report similar reassuring checks in a
county-level regression specification. We apply the same checks to our newspaper-level
data, finding no association between the FNC channel position and county characteristics
otherwise important for our endogenous regressor or outcome (Appendix C.2). Furthermore, in Figure 4, we will look at the timing of the effect (also including a placebo
outcome of local news slant from 1995 and 1996, before the introduction of FNC). We
find no placebo relationship and show that the effect emerges over time. Accordingly,
pre-existing newspaper characteristics do not drive our results.


5. Results

5.1. Main Results
   Figure 3 shows the reduced form results. The specification is the same as Figure 2,
with standardized FNC channel position on the horizontal axis, but now with the main
outcome variable, standardized newspaper slant, on the vertical axis. There is a clear
negative relationship that is statistically significant in the associated regression. This is
our first causal evidence that media slant is contagious. If the channel position of FNC
in a newspaper’s county is one standard deviation lower, slant is roughly one-tenth of a
standard deviation less Republican.
   Table 1 shows two-stage-least-squares estimates for the effect of higher FNC viewership on the slant of local newspapers. The right-hand side variable of interest is
instrumented FNC viewership. All columns include state fixed effects and demographic
controls. Column (2) also includes channel controls. Column (3) additionally controls for
generic newspaper language features. Both the explanatory and the outcome variables
are standardized.
   In all three columns, the estimated treatment effects are positive and statistically
significant. The magnitudes range from 0.72 in column (1), 0.49 in column (2), and 0.52
in column (3). Thus, while the channel controls slightly increase the coefficient size,
the newspaper language controls leave the estimate largely unchanged. The differences
across the three columns are safely within the confidence intervals. The interpretation is
as follows: If FNC viewership increases by one standard in the county j where newspaper
i circulates, i’s content becomes more slanted towards Republican language by about half
                                  Figure 3: Reduced Form: Republican Newspaper Slant and Fox News Position
                 .6
   Standardized Newspaper Slant
    -.6       -.2      .2


                                                                                              Coef = -.09** (.03)
                                                                                                   N = 718
                 -1


                                        2                3               4               5                          6
                                                    Standardized Fox News Channel Position

Notes: Binned scatterplots (equally sized bins) of the standardized newspaper slant (vertical axis)
against the standardized FNC channel position (horizontal axis). Cross-section with newspaper-level
observations weighted by newspaper circulation. We include state fixed effects, demographic controls,
and channel controls (see Table A.2 for the specific controls). Next to the axes, we show the distributions
of the underlying variables in light gray. The reported coefficients and standard errors are from OLS
estimates of the reduced form with clustering by state, along with the observation count.
                     Table 1: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership


                                                            Newspaper Slant
                                                            (1)          (2)        (3)

                  Fox News Channel Viewership           0.718**   0.492***     0.515**
                                                        (0.277)     (0.169)    (0.204)

                  Observations                              718         718         718
                  K-P First-Stage F-Stat                   9.01       14.70       15.06
                  State Fixed Effects                        ✓            ✓          ✓
                  Demographic Controls                       ✓            ✓          ✓
                  Channel Controls                                        ✓          ✓
                  Newspaper Language Controls                                        ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox
News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). The outcome is
the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles
among all articles. All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally,
column (2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix
A.4 lists all control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We cluster standard errors at
the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).


of a standard deviation.15
       To help interpret the magnitudes, let us compare the effect with differences in Congressional speeches. For this, we apply our model to Congressional speeches in 2005-2008
(the corpus based on which it was trained) and predict the average slant of Republican
and Democrat speeches. The respective values are 0.71 and 0.42 – i.e., 71% of Republican speeches are classified as right-wing by the model; 42% of Democrat speeches are
classified as right-wing. The difference between the two parties is 0.29 (see details in
Appendix B.3). The standard deviation of slant in our newspaper sample is 0.07. Thus,
if FNC viewership increases by one standard deviation, newspapers move to the right
by slightly more than one-tenth of the difference between the average Republican and
Democrat partisanship in 2005-2008. For a comparison from the media sector, let us
also scale the effect to the reporting of FNC vs. MSNBC. The slant values are 0.48 and
0.35, respectively, giving a difference of 0.13. Our effect size is thus about one-quarter
    OLS estimates are reported in Appendix C.3, and Appendix C.4 shows all reduced form results in
tabular form. We typically do not find significant effects of instrumented MSNBC viewership on slant
(see Appendix C.5).
of the difference between the two channels at that time.16
       Since our 2SLS estimation gives the local average treatment effect (LATE), it captures the effect for those newspapers responsive to the channel-position instrument. Our
2SLS estimates are larger than the OLS estimates (in line with Martin and Yurukoglu,
2017). Measurement error is one likely explanation for this, as discussed in Appendix
C.3. Furthermore, the compliers may experience larger effects than the average newspaper, analogously to the argument in Martin and Yurukoglu (2017, p. 2579) that less
partisan voters may be more persuadable by an exogenous increase in FNC exposure. In
our case, this argument is plausible both from a demand and supply viewpoint. Newspapers serving counties with persuadable readers plausibly shift their slant more than
newspapers serving those with stronger partisan preconceptions. On the supply side, it
is equally plausible that complier editors, journalists, or owners are those with weaker
pre-existing partisan agendas.

5.2. Robustness Checks
       We first show some robustness checks related to the slant measure in Appendix
C.6. For example, our results are very similar when measuring newspaper slant as the
share of Republican articles in partisan articles (i.e., Democrat or Republican articles)
instead of the share among all articles. Further, we find qualitatively similar results
by averaging the raw partisanship scores of articles at the newspaper level. Second,
we look at sampling and weighting. We confirm robustness to excluding outlets with
sparse coverage (<1000 articles per year, which could generate noisy slant measures) and
including routine announcements (e.g., obituaries). Next, we look at different weighting
schemes in Appendix C.7. Our results remain similar. Third, in Appendix C.8, we
define the instrument differently. We find qualitatively equivalent effects when using
FNC viewership relative to MSNBC viewership (instrumented by the difference between
the position of the two channels). Fourth, Appendix C.9 shows miscellaneous checks,
such as robustness to using census division (instead of state) fixed effects and dropping
    In the Congressional Record, less than 1% of speeches are predicted as neutral (with a score of
exactly zero). This may in part be due to the model being trained on that corpus; fewer speeches will
not contain any predictive bigram and hence obtain a zero score by construction. Meanwhile, 17% of
the cable transcripts are coded as neutral. If we focus only on partisan TV transcripts, the difference
between the two channels is more similar to the Republican-Democrat difference in Congress (now 0.58
vs. 0.40). Our results for newspapers are robust to only focusing on partisan articles (see the robustness
checks right below).
observations where viewership is likely measured imprecisely (low number of Nielsen
respondents). We also run leave-one-out analyses at the state level. Our findings are not
driven by any single state and, by extension, any single newspaper.


6. Mechanisms
       An important question regarding slant contagion is why newspaper content becomes
more conservative in response to higher FNC viewership. Among the explanations that
could (jointly) play a role are (i) persuasion, (ii) cost-saving motives, and (iii) market
competition.

Persuasion. Both supply-side and demand-side actors could be persuaded by FNC.
On the supply side, coverage by FNC could persuade journalists and editors, leading
them to make reporting and framing choices in line with that channel’s content (or
make previously conservative journalists and editors perceive such reporting as more
professionally acceptable). Moreover, it could persuade owners to change their editorial
stance. On the demand side, FNC could directly influence readers’ preferences for more
conservative content. In our setting, we cannot cleanly disentangle supply from demand
factors.17 In what follows, we show evidence that slant changes seem to coincide with
changes in voting, which could be more supportive of the demand side: While FNC
potentially influences journalists, it is unlikely that FNC’s impact on voters would occur
solely through local newspaper coverage.
       Figure 4 looks at timing. It shows the reduced form effect of FNC’s channel position
on newspaper slant for different periods.18 Each coefficient comes from a separate regression using the reduced-form specification from Figure 3: regressing slant on FNC channel
position with state fixed effects, demographic, and channel controls. For each plotted
coefficient, the outcome is the newspaper slant based on articles from the respective period (with periods indicated on the horizontal axis). To calculate these historical slant
      The literature provides mixed evidence. Some work shows that slant across U.S. newspapers reflects the political preferences of readers rather than producers (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2010), while
other work documents that media ownership influences or is correlated with news content (Gilens and
Hertzman, 2000; Martin and McCrain, 2019; Mastrorocco and Ornaghi, 2024; Szeidl and Szucs, 2021;
Matter and Widmer, 2021).
      We use the reduced form and not 2SLS because we only have viewership data for 2005-2008. While
viewership varies substantially over time, the channel positions are relatively persistent (Martin and
Yurukoglu, 2017).
                                Figure 4: Reduced Form: (Historical) Republican Newspaper Slant and Fox News Position


                                       .2
   Reduced Form Coefficient Estimate


                                       .1
                                       -.1


                                       -.2


                                       -.3
                                                                     0
                                                                                                            8
                                                                  00
                                                                                                         00
                                                  -1


                                                                -2


                                                                                    -2


                                                                                                       -2
                                                             97
                                                                                                    05
                                                           19
                                                                                                  20


                                                                         Time Period

Notes: Reduced form coefficients with newspapers as observation units. Each coefficient is from a
separate regression mirroring the specification from Table C.4’s second column: the reduced form with
state fixed effects, as well as demographic and channel controls and observations weighted by circulation.
The outcome is Republican slant based on historical newspaper articles (see periods indicated on the
horizontal axis), and the underlying models to quantify slant are based on models from historical
Congress speeches. We obtain the newspaper articles from NewsLibrary only for fewer outlets in
earlier period: for 95-96, the coefficient is based on 139 newspapers, for 97-00 on 340 newspapers, and
for 01-04 on 503 (relative to 718 in our main sample). The fourth estimate is our main observation
period (05-08) but using the same sample as for 01-04 (i.e., 503) outlets.
measures, we train separate models based on Congressional speeches from the respective
period (see Appendix B.4). For example, for 1995-1996, we use a given newspaper’s articles from that period and predict their slant using a model trained with Congressional
speeches from that same period.19
       As the figure shows, the FNC channel position is not associated with newspaper slant
before the channel’s introduction. This is reassuring from an identification perspective,
as it shows the channel position was not endogenously selected with prior newspaper
slant. The wide confidence interval reflects the limited number of newspapers available
in the dataset, primarily due to the lower coverage of earlier years in the NewsLibrary.
For instance, in 1995-1996, we could retrieve articles for only 139 newspapers out of the
718 in our main sample.20 .
       Next, we take all the post-introduction years for which we have data (1997-2008).
We take these twelve years and divide them equally into three periods: 1997-2000, 20012004, and 2005-2008. In 1997-2000, we have data for 340 outlets. We do not find any
effect of FNC exposure on slant; the coefficient is of the opposite sign, close to zero
(0.02), and insignificant. For 2001-2004, where we observe 503 newspapers, we find a
similarly sized, again insignificant coefficient. Next, we look at our main observation
period, 2005-2008, but only focus on the newspapers observed in 2001-2004. We still
recover our effects (-0.08 with p<0.05).21
       First, from the very small and insignificant effect in the earlier years, we conclude
that our main results are, indeed, driven by FNC and not pre-existing newspaper characteristics. Second, these results inform on the potential mechanisms as our effects follow
the channel’s effect on Republican vote share. DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007) and Martin
and Yurukoglu (2017) find that FNC had already increased the Republican vote share
in 2000 by one-quarter to one-half of a percentage point.22 However, the effect grew
considerably over time, reaching 6.34 percentage points in 2008 (Martin and Yurukoglu,
p. 2568). Hence, our evidence is consistent with newspapers having shifted their slant
over time in response to changed political preferences in their county community.23
     As for the main results, we do not train slant models year-by-year but pool several years for robust
models.
     We ensure that non-findings for earlier periods are not due to different samples right below
     The difference between 2001-2004 and 2005-2008 cannot be due to varying article numbers; the
analysis builds on roughly 15 million articles for both periods, see Appendix A.3.
     This is the channel’s effect at the extensive margin.
     Appendix D.1 confirms the robustness of Figure 4.
       We also look at geographical congruence in the effect on newspapers with the effect
on voters in the cross section. Appendix D.2 builds causal forest models to estimate
conditional average treatment effects across counties, for both news slant and vote shares,
following the method in Athey et al. (2019). We show that counties with higher predicted
treatment effects from our instrument on 2008 Republican vote shares tend to be counties
where local newspapers shift more toward Republican language. This adds additional
evidence in support of persuasion being an important explanation for our effects.

Cost-saving through borrowing of content. Next, we discuss cost-saving motives
in terms of journalistic time use. Holding political preferences constant, pure costsaving motives could manifest where producers use more readily available content and,
in a potential trade-off between what readers want and cheaper content, the cost-saving
outweighs the effect of losing some readers.24 Cost motives could play a role when rightwing content becomes more available. However, those motives alone are unlikely to
explain our effects – for two reasons. First, if citizens change their political preferences
(as the previous paragraph suggests), they plausibly change their local news reporting
tastes – unless local news reporting is fully decoupled from national political preferences.
Such a full decoupling is unlikely in the light of evidence that cable TV has reshaped
local policy preferences (Ash and Galletta, 2023).
       The second reason cost motives are unlikely to fully explain our effects lies in the
topics that it shifts. We can show that local newspapers weave the Republican slant into
their original local reporting.25 As outlined in Appendix D.3, we recover our main results
when we construct, for each newspaper, the slant measure only based on the articles
covering local news. Most articles in our overall sample cover local news (72% on average
at the newspaper level). This rules out verbatim copy-pasting of the predominantly
national (or international) FNC stories as a major driver of our results. Of course, the
right-wing language could still be weaved into local stories simply because it is more
available. However, given the size of our effect (just focusing on local news, we still
find that if viewership increases by one standard deviation, articles move to the right by
almost one-quarter of the difference between FNC and MSNBC) and the likely presence
of persuasion, we see cost-saving motives as a possibly complementary but incomplete
     For instance, Martin and McCrain (2019) discuss a similar trade-off regarding cheaper national
news and potentially preferred local news in local TV stations.
     Appendix B.9 describes how we distinguish local from non-local news.
explanation for our results.

Market competition. A final potential mechanism is that newspapers shift their
ideological positioning due to market competition with Fox News. We do not have
strong evidence either way on this mechanism. But based on empirical and theoretical
arguments outlined in Appendix D.4, we conclude that market competition is not a
major driver of our results.


7. Conclusion
   We document that exposure to partisan cable television, specifically Fox News Channel (FNC), influences the reporting of local newspapers. We quantify the slant of local
news content by scaling it to speeches by Republican and Democrat speakers in Congress.
We show that the local news slant becomes more Republican in counties with a higher
quasi-experimental exposure to FNC. To this end, we use the channel’s position in the
cable lineup as an instrument for FNC viewership. Looking at the timing, we conclude
that local newspapers likely change their slant in response to shifted policy priorities in
their community (e.g., readers persuaded by the messaging of FNC). Our evidence also
suggests the newspapers shift the slant in their local reporting. This means newspapers
do not simply reproduce the stories from FNC (since the latter is nationally oriented),
but weave the right-wing slant into their own, original reporting.
   These results add to the literature on the political effects of biased news. We provide
new evidence on how partisan media influences not just voting and policies but also
the content of other media organizations. Our results highlight that media outlets or
technologies cannot necessarily be considered independent from each other. In addition,
future work must allow for secondary indirect effects of partisan media. Such effects
could work on voting and other outcomes by reshaping news landscapes and influencing
the content of other media providers.
   Indeed, our research leaves as an open question whether the contagious-slant effect
had further downstream effects, for example on the voting behavior of newspaper readers.
The observed shift in local news content might amplify FNC’s effect in persuading voters
to become more right-wing. Especially, since FNC increases right-wing slant on localnews topics – which FNC as a national outlet does not cover – that could induce rightward
shifts in policy preferences on local issues that FNC messaging on its own would not.
The evidence in Ash and Galletta (2023) on FNC’s effect on local fiscal policies could be
an example of such secondary impacts. These findings highlight how national partisan
media can shape local discourse even without direct links such as ownership, adding to
concerns about the diminished public debate when local media’s role as a moderating
voice is weakened (e.g., Djourelova et al., 2024; Darr et al., 2018).
References
Adena, M., Enikolopov, R., Petrova, M., Santarosa, V., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2015).
  Radio and the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4):1885–1939.
Angelucci, C., Cagé, J., and Sinkinson, M. (2024). Media Competition and News Diets.
  American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 16(2):62–102.
Ash, E. and Galletta, S. (2023). How Cable News Reshaped Local Government. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Ash, E., Galletta, S., Hangartner, D., Margalit, Y., and Pinna, M. (2024a). The Effect
  of Fox News on Health Behavior During COVID-19. Political Analysis, 32(2):275–284.
Ash, E., Galletta, S., Pinna, M., and Warshaw, C. S. (2024b). From Viewers to Voters:
  Tracing Fox News’ Impact on American Democracy. Journal of Public Economics,
  240:105–256.
Ash, E. and Hansen, S. (2022). Text Algorithms in Economics. Annual Review of
  Economics.
Ash, E. and Poyker, M. (2023). Conservative News Media and Criminal Justice: Evidence
  from Exposure to the Fox News Channel. The Economic Journal, 134(660):1331–1355.
Ashworth, S. and Shotts, K. W. (2010). Does Informative Media Commentary Reduce
  Politicians’ Incentives to Pander? Journal of Public Economics, 94(11-12):838–847.
Athey, S., Tibshirani, J., and Wager, S. (2019). Generalized Random Rorests. The
  Annals of Statistics, 47(2):1148–1178.
Bursztyn, L., Rao, A., Roth, C., and Yanagizawa-Drott, D. (2022). Opinions as Facts.
  The Review of Economic Studies, 90(4):1832–1864.
Cagé, J., Hervé, N., and Mazoyer, B. (2020a). Social Media Influence Mainstream Media:
  Evidence from Two Billion Tweets. Available at SSRN 3663899.
Cagé, J., Hervé, N., and Viaud, M.-L. (2020b). The Production of Information in an
  Online World. The Review of Economic Studies, 87(5):2126–2164.
Cagé, J., Le Pennec, C., and Mougin, E. (2024). Firm donations and political rhetoric:
  Evidence from a national ban.      American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  16(3):217–256.
Chiang, C.-F. and Knight, B. G. (2011). Media Bias and Influence: Evidence from
  Newspaper Endorsements. Review of Economic Studies, 78(3):795–820.
Darr, J. P., Hitt, M. P., and Dunaway, J. L. (2018). Newspaper Closures Polarize Voting
  Behavior. Journal of Communication, 68(6):1007–1028.
DellaVigna, S., Enikolopov, R., Mironova, V., Petrova, M., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2014).
  Cross-Border Media and Nationalism: Evidence from Serbian Radio in Croatia. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(3):103–32.
DellaVigna, S. and Kaplan, E. (2007). The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3):1187–1234.
Denny, M. J. and Spirling, A. (2018). Text Preprocessing for Unsupervised Learning:
  Why it Matters, When It Misleads, and What To Do About It. Political Analysis,
  26(2):168–189.
Djourelova, M. (2023). Persuasion Through Slanted Language: Evidence from the Media
  Coverage of Immigration. American Economic Review.
Djourelova, M., Durante, R., and Martin, G. J. (2024). The Impact of Online Competition on Local Newspapers: Evidence from the Introduction of Craigslist. The Review
  of Economic Studies, page rdae049.
Drago, F., Nannicini, T., and Sobbrio, F. (2014). Meet the Press: How Voters and
  Politicians Respond to Newspaper Entry and Exit. American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 6(3):159–88.
Eaton, B. C. and Lipsey, R. G. (1975). The Principle of Minimum Differentiation Reconsidered: Some New Developments in the Theory of Spatial Competition. The Review
  of Economic Studies, 42(1):27–49.
Enikolopov, R., Petrova, M., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2011). Media and Political Persuasion: Evidence from Russia. American Economic Review, 101(7):3253–3285.
Gennaro, G. and Ash, E. (2022). Emotion and reason in political language. The Economic Journal, 132(643):1037–1059.
Gentzkow, M., Kelly, B., and Taddy, M. (2019a). Text as Data. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 57(3):535–74.
Gentzkow, M. and Shapiro, J. M. (2010). What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from US
  Daily Newspapers. Econometrica, 78(1):35–71.
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., and Sinkinson, M. (2011). The Effect of Newspaper Entry
  and Exit on Electoral Politics. American Economic Review, 101(7):2980–3018.
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., and Sinkinson, M. (2014). United States Newspaper Panel,
  1869-2004. Technical Report ICPSR30261, Inter-university Consortium for Political
  and Social Research.
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., and Stone, D. F. (2015). Media Bias in the Marketplace:
  Theory. In Anderson, S. P., Waldfogel, J., and Stroemberg, D., editors, Handbook of
  Media Economics, volume 1, pages 623–645. North-Holland.
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., and Taddy, M. (2019b). Measuring Group Differences in
  High-Dimensional Choices: Method and Application to Congressional Speech. Econometrica, 87(4):1307–1340.
George, L. M. and Waldfogel, J. (2006). The New York Times and the Market for Local
  Newspapers. American Economic Review, 96(1):435–447.
Gilens, M. and Hertzman, C. (2000). Corporate Ownership and News Bias: Newspaper
  Coverage of the 1996 Telecommunications Act. Journal of Politics, 62(2):369–386.
Groseclose, T. and Milyo, J. (2005). A Measure of Media Bias. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 120(4):1191 – 1238.
Harmon, M. and Muenchen, R. (2009). Semantic Framing in the Build-up to the Iraq
  War: Fox v. CNN and other U.S. Broadcast News Programs. ETC: A Review of
  General Semantics, 66(1):12–26.
Hatte, S., Madinier, E., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2021). Reading Twitter in the Newsroom:
  Web 2.0 and Traditional-Media Reporting of Conflicts. Available at SSRN 3886588.
Hopkins, D. J. and Ladd, J. M. (2014). The Consequences of Broader Media Choice:
  Evidence from the Expansion of Fox News. Quarterly Journal of Political Science,
  9(1):115–135.
Li, Z. and Martin, G. J. (2022). Media and Ideological Movements: How Fox News Built
  the Tea Party. Technical report, Working Paper.
Martin, G. J. and McCrain, J. (2019). Local News and National Politics. American
  Political Science Review, 113(2):372–384.
Martin, G. J. and Yurukoglu, A. (2017). Bias in Cable News: Persuasion and Polarization. American Economic Review, 107(9):2565–2599.
Mastrorocco, N. and Ornaghi, A. (2024). Who Watches the Watchmen? Local News and
  Police Behavior in the United States. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
  Forthcoming.
Matter, U. and Widmer, P. (2021). Who Owns the Online Media? Available at SSRN
  3969253.
Osnabrügge, M., Ash, E., and Morelli, M. (2021). Cross-Domain Topic Classification for
  Political Texts. Political Analysis.
Peterson, A. and Spirling, A. (2018). Classification Accuracy as a Substantive Quantity of Interest: Measuring Polarization in Westminster Systems. Political Analysis,
  forthcoming.
Prat, A. (2018). Media Power. Journal of Political Economy, 126(4):1747 – 1783.
Prat, A. and Stroemberg, D. (2013). The Political Economy of Mass Media, volume 2 of
  Econometric Society Monographs, page 135–187. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Puglisi, R. and Snyder, J. M. (2011). Newspaper Coverage of Political Scandals. The
  journal of politics, 73(3):931–950.
Puglisi, R. and Snyder, J. M. (2015). Empirical Studies of Media Bias. In Anderson, S. P.,
  Waldfogel, J., and Stroemberg, D., editors, Handbook of Media Economics, volume 1,
  pages 647–667. North-Holland.
Schroeder, E. and Stone, D. F. (2015). Fox News and Political Knowledge. Journal of
  Public Economics, 126:52–63.
Simonov, A., Sacher, S., Dube, J.-P., and Biswas, S. (2022). Frontiers: The Persuasive
  Effect of Fox News: Noncompliance with Social Distancing During the COVID-19
  Pandemic. Marketing Science, 41(2):230–242.
Snyder, J. M. and Strömberg, D. (2010). Press Coverage and Political Accountability.
  Journal of Political Economy, 118(2):355–408.
Stroemberg, D. (2015). Media and Politics. Annual Review of Economics, 7:173–205.
Szeidl, A. and Szucs, F. (2021). Media Capture through Favor Exchange. Econometrica,
  89:281–310.
Taddy, M. (2013). Multinomial Inverse Regression for Text Analysis. Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 108(503):755–770.
Taddy, M. (2015). Distributed multinomial regression. The Annals of Applied Statistics,
  9(3):1394–1414.
Taddy, M. (2017). One-Step Estimator Paths for Concave Regularization. Journal of
  Computational and Graphical Statistics, 26(3):525–536.
Yanagizawa-Drott, D. (2014). Propaganda and Conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan
  Genocide. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4):1947–1994.
Zou, H., Hastie, T. J., and Tibshirani, R. (2007). On the “degrees of freedom” of the
  lasso. Annals of Statistics, 35:2173–2192.
                          Online Appendices
A. Data Appendix

A.1. Newspaper Articles
       First, we provide some more info on NewsLibrary. For each article, the NewsLibrary
provides the newspaper name, the headline, the date, the byline (if any), and (approximately) the first 80 words of the article. We focus on the first 80 words since, at the
time of our data construction (June-August 2019), our subscription allowed us to access
these article previews at large.26 An example of such a newspaper snippet is shown in
Figure A.1.

                     Figure A.1: Example of a Local Newspaper Article Snippet


                    Aberdeen American News
                    Wet conditions leave ripe crops exposed to threats, including hungry animals and landlines
                    October 22, 2007

                    Harvest is behind schedule in northeast South Dakota
                    and in the state as a whole because of wet weather last
                    week.A year ago Saturday, the soybean harvest was 93
                    percent completed in South Dakota, according to the
                    Farm Forum. This year, it was 61 percent finished in
                    the state before the wet spell began Oct. 13, but little
                    has been harvested since, according to the National
                    Agricultural Statistics Service. A year ago, the Farm
                    Forum reported that frosty conditions during the week
                    [...]


       In principle, NewsLibrary encompasses almost 4,000 (to be precise, 3,966) unique
outlets for 2005-2008. However, many outlets are not local newspapers, and they cannot
be assigned to a county (e.g., the “Army Communicator” or the “Air & Space” magazine).
Furthermore, NewsLibrary often lists different editions of the same outlet separately. For
    Full articles were available on a pay-per-piece basis, which was prohibitively expensive given our
broad coverage in time and space.
instance, “Augusta Chronicle, the (GA)”, “Augusta Chronicle, the: Web Edition Articles
(GA)”, and “Augusta Chronicle, the: Blogs (GA)” are listed separately. So, while our
initial data collection for 2005-2008 covers 3,966 outlets (amounting to almost 44 million
article snippets, see Section A.3), our main analyses focus on 718 outlets (and 15.1
million articles) that we can match to a county and for which county-level circulation
data is available (see Section 2). These 718 outlets are after collapsing different editions
of the same outlet (as in the Augusta Chronicle example) to one observation because
the ICPSR circulation data is typically not available separately for different editions of
the same outlet.
   For some outlets, not many articles are available. Section C.6 shows that our effects
are robust to excluding articles with an average of fewer than 1,000 articles per year
(and, hence, potentially noisy slant measures).

A.2. County Matching of Newspapers
   We match the sources listed in NewsLibrary to counties as follows: As a first step,
we obtain the main county for each newspaper outlet based on the newspaper name and
geographical information provided by NewsLibrary: For example, The Call (Woonsocket,
RI) or the Albany Democrat-Herald (OR). Where such information is unavailable or
not conclusive, we also consult the U.S. Newspaper Directory and run manual web
searches. Then, as a second step, we match each newspaper to circulation data from
the ICPSR. For this, we create a crosswalk using programmatic (exact and fuzzy) and
manual matching. We verify each crosswalk entry manually. Using the crosswalk, we
assign a newspaper’s total circulation to the county we identified in the first step. We
use 2004 total circulation for our main results (Section 5.1) and also 1996 circulation in
robustness checks or when exploring the dynamics (Sections 5.2 and 6).

A.3. Filtering of the Article Snippets
   Table A.1 gives an overview of the number of articles collected and how we obtain
the number of articles used in our main analyses and robustness checks.
                Table A.1: Number of Articles Collected and Filtering

Filtering                                      # Articles               Results

All periods:
Raw scrapes 1995-2008                           93,052,154     None (impossible: no
                                                                county assignment)

Main sample 2005-2008:
Raw scrapes                                     43,398,647     None (impossible: no
                                                                county assignment)
Thereof matched to circulation data             15,971,420     None (impossible: no
                                                                county assignment)
Thereof in regression (matched to county)       15,083,400              Table 1

Historical sample 2001-2004:
Raw scrapes                                     25,235,432       None (impossible)
Thereof matched to circulation data             16,958,903       None (impossible)
Thereof in regression (matched to county)       15,683,175              Figure 4

Historical sample 1997-2000:
Raw scrapes                                     17,665,212       None (impossible)
Thereof matched to circulation data             11,903,173       None (impossible)
Thereof in regression (matched to county)       11,078,928              Figure 4

Placebo sample 1995-1996:
Raw scrapes                                      6,752,863       None (impossible)
Thereof matched to circulation data              4,609,961       None (impossible)
Thereof in regression (matched to county)        4,307,622              Figure 4
A.4. Summary Statistics

                                    Table A.2: Summary Statistics

 Variable                                                    Mean    STD     Min     Max      N
 Newspapers
 05-08 main slant measure (share Rep. articles)              0.36    0.07    0.00    1.00     718
 05-08 alternative slant (as main but incl. obituaries)      0.35    0.07    0.00    1.00     718
 05-08 alternative slant (avg. article-level partisanship)   0.00    0.03    -0.39   0.36     718
 05-08 main slant only for local news                        0.35    0.07    0.00    1.00     718
 05-08 Democrat slant (share Dem. articles)                  0.33    0.06    0.00    1.00     718
 05-08 alternative slant (share Rep. among partisan)         0.52    0.06    0.00    1.00     717
 01-04 main slant (share Rep. articles)                      0.21    0.06    0.00    1.00     504
 01-04 Democrat slant (share Dem. articles)                  0.49    0.07    0.00    1.00     504
 97-02 main slant (share Rep. articles)                      0.18    0.09    0.00    1.00     342
 97-02 Democrat slant (share Dem. articles)                  0.52    0.13    0.00    1.00     342
 95-96 main slant (share Rep. articles)                      0.19    0.12    0.00    1.00     151
 95-96 Democrat slant (share Dem. articles)                  0.53    0.14    0.00    1.00     151
 Share of local news                                         0.73    0.12    0.24    1.00     718
 Circulation (1000s)                                         40.88   7.46    0.75    65.24    718
 Circulation 96 (1000s)                                      45.17   80.16   0.92    634.63   608
 Word length                                                 4.75    0.09    4.38    5.51     718
 Article length                                              86      4       64      102      718
 Vocabulary size                                             0.11    0.11    0.02    0.74     718
 Collected articles/year (1000s)                             21.01   33.24   1       308.55   718
 News Channels
 FNC channel position 2005-2008                              42.30   11.07   5.00    71.83    718
 MSNBC channel position 2005-2008                            45.13   12.47   13.25   108.25   718
 Ratings % FNC 2005-2008                                     0.55    0.28    0.00    3.48     718
 Ratings % MSNBC 2005-2008                                   0.15    0.49    0.00    13.00    718
 Share pop. access to CNN 2005-2008                          0.97    0.06    0.05    1.00     718
 Share pop. access to FNC 2005-2008                          0.96    0.07    0.04    1.00     718
 Share pop. access to MSNBC 2005-2008                        0.93    0.13    0.03    1.00     718
 Number of Nielsen survey respondents                        604     960     3       7052     718
                      Table A.2 Continued: Summary Statistics
Variable                                      Mean     STD       Min     Max       N
Demographics
Population (1000s)                            411.08   1048.10   6.09    9818.54   718
Population density                            675      2410      3       33886     718
Republican vote share 1996                    0.43     0.10      0.14    0.68      718
Share Whites                                  0.79     0.16      0.21    0.99      718
Share Blacks                                  0.10     0.12      0.00    0.77      718
Share Asians                                  0.03     0.05      0.00    0.44      718
Share Hispanics                               0.12     0.15      0.00    0.96      718
Share males                                   0.49     0.01      0.45    0.61      718
Share age 10-29                               0.41     0.05      0.24    0.64      718
Share age 30-59                               0.40     0.03      0.27    0.49      718
Share urban                                   0.47     0.41      0.00    1.00      718
Share high school graduates                   0.31     0.07      0.12    0.53      718
Share some college education                  0.29     0.05      0.15    0.41      718
Share Bachelor’s degree                       0.16     0.06      0.05    0.41      718
Share postgraduate degree                     0.09     0.04      0.03    0.27      718
Share food stamp recipients                   0.12     0.05      0.01    0.32      718
Share management occupations                  0.32     0.06      0.19    0.56      718
Share service occupations                     0.18     0.03      0.11    0.32      718
Share office occupations                      0.24     0.02      0.17    0.31      718
Share construction occupations                0.03     0.01      0.01    0.12      718
Share production occupations                  0.14     0.05      0.03    0.32      718
Share arts occupations                        0.03     0.01      0.01    0.10      718
Share same-sex households                     0.00     0.00      0.00    0.02      718
Share homeowners                              0.69     0.08      0.22    0.86      718
Median tax rate                               0.01     0.01      0.00    0.03      718
Aggregated taxes (million)                    13.12    10.52     0.41    55.56     718
Median household income (1000s)               50.54    12.28     24.10   95.11     718
Median housing values                         184.43   126.65    53.29   826.73    718
B. Methods Appendix
   This section presents additional material on measuring slant in newspaper articles
using speeches from the Congressional Record.

B.1. Text Pre-processing
   We preprocess all texts (i.e., newspaper articles, congressional speeches) by converting the text to lowercase, removing punctuation and extra white spaces, expanding
contractions, eliminating stopwords (including common stopwords like and or or, city
and state names, and those specific to Congress and Congress members as defined by
Gentzkow et al., 2019a), as well as digits, timestamps, locations, and authorship metadata. Second, we perform tokenization and stemming (employing the Porter stemming
algorithm). Finally, we form bigrams (phrases of two words) and remove procedural
bigrams, such as “hear tell” or “time question,” which are uninformative about the core
topics of the text.

B.2. Frequency Filtering
   Let Vk be the bigram vocabulary used in speeches from members of party k, where k ∈
{Republican, Democrat}. We exclude speeches not given by Republicans or Democrats
(e.g., Independents). Let Fkb be the frequency of bigram b in speeches by members of
party k. We construct VRep and VDem . Then, we impose the following conditions on our
vocabulary: a bigram must appear in at least 0.1% of either Democrat or Republican
speeches and 0.01% of both Democrat and Republican speeches. The resulting set of
bigrams is denoted as

                                  0.1    0.1       0.01    0.01
                           
                        V = b ∈ (VRep ∪ VDem ) ∩ (VRep  ∩ VDem  )

   We remove infrequently used phrases to make computation faster (following, e.g.,
Gentzkow et al., 2019b, or Cagé et al., 2024). The frequency threshold also makes it
likely that the bigrams capture important political topics discussed in the media and
not exclusively niche topics. Excluding bigrams used uniquely by one party ensures that
the vocabulary reflects partisan language within the broader political discourse and not
highly idiosyncratic terms – this is again keeping in mind our goal of applying the model
to newspaper language. This procedure produces a vocabulary V with 14,224 bigrams.
B.3. Validation in the Congressional Record
       To validate our approach, we use these predicted coefficients ϕb (see Section 3.3)
to estimate partisanship for Republican and Democratic speeches. We determine the
partisanship of a speech n by projecting its observed relative bigram frequencies onto a
partisan scale, formalized as:
                                                        X
                             Speech_Partisanshipn =           fbn · ϕb                       (5)
                                                        b∈V


where Speech_Partisanshipn represents the partisan score for speech n.
       Each speech’s partisanship is, therefore, determined by the weighted sum of the
bigram coefficients, with weights corresponding to bigram frequencies. Speeches with
negative scores are classified as Democratic and those with positive scores as Republican.
Our prediction accuracy is 0.64, and the corresponding confusion matrix is presented
in Table B.1.27 Looking at our slant measure directly instead of accuracy, Democrat
speeches have an average score of 0.42 and Republican speeches of 0.71 – meaning 42%
of Democrat speeches and 71% of Republican speeches are predicted as Republican by
the model – with a difference of 0.29. Reassuringly, the model predicts higher scores for
Republicans.
       As an additional plausibility check, let us quantify the difference between FNC and
MSNBC. The slant values are 0.48 and 0.35, respectively, giving a difference of 0.13.
As expected, FNC is more Republican than MSNBC. The difference between the two
channels is even larger when we only focus on the predicted partisan transcripts (around
83%). Then, the difference between the channels is closer to the Republican-Democrat
difference in Congress: 0.18 (0.58 vs. 0.40). For this check, we collected the cable news
network transcripts for FNC and MSNBC prime-time shows from LexisNexis for the
2005-2008 period. We subject them to the same pre-processing steps as the Congressional
    0.2% of speeches are predicted with a score of 0. Given the binary nature of our sense-making
exercise, we include them as Republican, which is inconsequential given the small share.
speeches and then predict their partisanship.28


 Table B.1: Prediction Performance for Identifying Congressional Speeches - GST Model 2005-2008

                                    Predicted Democrat             Predicted Republican
          Actual Democrat                 31.58% (58K)                    23.25% (43K)
          Actual Republican               12.92% (24K)                    32.26% (59K)
Notes: Confusion matrix for congressional speeches (182,943 speeches). The top left cell represents
true positives for the Democrat class; the bottom right cell represents true positives for the Republican
class; the top right cell represents false negatives for Democrats; the bottom left cell represents false
negatives for Republicans. The diagonal cells contain the true positive classifications for each class,
and the off-diagonal cells contain the misclassifications.


B.4. Slant Models for Alternative Time Periods

                          Table B.2: Number of congress speeches per model

 Model Period                                2005-2008       2001-2004        1998-2000        1995-1997
 Number of Congress Speeches                   182,943          171,852         143,747          171,637
 Share of Republican Speeches (%)                55.4             55.1            53.3            54.8


       Following the methodology outlined in Section 3.2, we estimate the model and bigram partisanship using the same vocabulary V , which was constructed over the entire
1995–2008 period, and apply it to the sub-periods 1995–1997, 1998–2000, 2001–2004, and
2005–2008. That is, we divided the entire period 1995-2008 into four (almost) equally
sized periods to build four models for slant prediction. Table B.2 summarizes the number
of congressional speeches. Table B.3 presents the most partisan bigrams for Democrats
and Republicans along with their estimated partisan coefficient by model. We also show
each bigram’s frequency in newspaper articles during the corresponding period.
     For FNC, 12 shows were included (Fox News Edge, Fox News Sunday, Glenn Beck, Hannity, On the
Record with Greta van Susteren, O’Reilly Factor, Special Report with Bret Baier, Special Report with
Brit Hume, The Edge with Paula Zahn, The Five, The Kelly File, and Your World with Neil Cavuto),
for MSNBC 18 shows (All In with Chris Hayes, Ashleigh Banfield On Location, Buchanan & Press,
Countdown with Keith Olbermann, Donahue, Hardball with Chris Matthews, Live with Dan Abrams,
Morning Joe, Politics Nation, Race for the White House/1600 Pennsylvania Ave., Rita Cosby Live and
Direct, Scarborough Country, The Ed Show, The Last Word with Lawrence O’Donnell, The News with
Brian Williams, The Rachel Maddow Show, The Savage Nation, and Tucker), totaling 25,745 transcripts
for the 2005-2008 period.
B.5. Most Partisan Phrases
   We provide additional visualizations of the most distinctive bigrams used to predict
Republican and Democratic leanings in the context of newspaper snippets. Figure B.1 is
similar to Figure 1: It also displays the most predictive bigrams for either Republican or
Democratic speech in Congress. However, in B.1, the font size represents the frequency
of bigrams in newspapers. That is, it shows which partisan bigrams are frequently used
in local newspaper articles.


                       Table B.3: Most partisan bigrams by period model


     Period     Democrat                Coef     Count       Republican           Coef    Count

    2005–2008   gun safeti              -3.55         579    liabil reform         3.51     105
    2005–2008   surplus trillion        -2.69           27   margin tax            3.05     125
    2005–2008   gun violenc             -2.51        1806    unborn child          2.92    1709
    2005–2008   break wealthi           -2.50         101    crime introduc        2.89      18
    2005–2008   redeploy troop          -2.48          197   size govern           2.82     261
    2005–2008   occup iraq              -2.45         1006   medic liabil          2.78     322
    2005–2008   trillion surplus        -2.44           37   unborn children       2.77     350
    2005–2008   dog coalit              -2.39          84    largest tax           2.69     496
    2005–2008   assault weapon          -2.37         1954   control spend         2.65     548
    2005–2008   privat social           -2.33        1596    deliv babi            2.53    1388
    2005–2008   wealthiest american     -2.28         251    repeal death          2.51     162
    2005–2008   republican refus        -2.22         259    harm come             2.50     120
    2005–2008   tobacco product         -2.18        1878    entitl spend          2.49     104
    2005–2008   asian pacif             -2.14          596   death tax             2.48    1408
    2005–2008   lowincom work           -2.13         252    tax hike              2.46    4735
    2005–2008   cut wealthi             -2.13         295    partialbirth abort    2.41     734
    2005–2008   presid cheney           -2.11         1808   growth feder          2.34     121
    2005–2008   hispan caucus           -2.07         168    marriag tax           2.22      40
    2005–2008   administr fail          -2.05         672    twothird favor        2.20      14
    2005–2008   invad iraq              -2.04         2196   growth spend          2.19     188
    2005–2008   leav child              -1.98          593   duti defend           2.16      52
    2005–2008   school facil            -1.95        3298    human embryo          2.16    1125
    2005–2008   school build            -1.93        12932   unfund liabil         2.11     375
    2005–2008   deficit debt            -1.89           34   elimin marriag        2.09      21
    2005–2008   cut wealthiest          -1.88           82   miguel estrada        2.04      14
    2005–2008   corpor profit           -1.88        1099    law send              2.04     205
 Period     Democrat                 Coef     Count      Republican        Coef    Count

2005–2008   earn million             -1.88        9090   percent growth     2.04    1816
2005–2008   fail polici              -1.85         561   million illeg      2.02    3055
2005–2008   republican join          -1.85         891   polit correct      2.02    4186
2005–2008   unfortun republican      -1.84          47   rais tax           2.00    9488

2001–2004   unfortun republican      -2.97          24   harm come          3.52     117
2001–2004   republican refus         -2.80        201    crime introduc     3.37      21
2001–2004   wealthiest percent       -2.64         198   duti defend        3.18      62
2001–2004   republican allow         -2.61         110   peopl illeg        2.86     438
2001–2004   congression caucus       -2.51         474   repeal death       2.63      76
2001–2004   work longer              -2.47         548   liabil reform      2.60     185
2001–2004   break wealthi            -2.44          89   medic liabil       2.57     707
2001–2004   congression republican   -2.43        1273   societi like       2.51     321
2001–2004   wealthiest american      -2.36         217   death tax          2.46    1190
2001–2004   dog coalit               -2.35          33   terribl crime      2.43     162
2001–2004   budget fail              -2.31         244   enforc enhanc      2.40      17
2001–2004   asian pacif              -2.23         530   budget estim       2.39     431
2001–2004   defeat previous          -2.21         320   law send           2.38     161
2001–2004   smaller class            -2.19         721   rule control       2.38     128
2001–2004   administr refus          -2.16         436   defend citizen     2.36      74
2001–2004   republican leadership    -2.15        1283   deliv babi         2.27    1363
2001–2004   deep cut                 -2.12        1343   growth spend       2.22     120
2001–2004   republican friend        -2.12         169   control propon     2.22      10
2001–2004   peopl color              -2.10         936   control rank       2.21      11
2001–2004   republican propos        -2.09         659   appropri budget    2.19     200
2001–2004   republican budget        -2.08         321   chang heart        2.17    1612
2001–2004   cut republican           -2.08         211   rule natur         2.10      98
2001–2004   massiv tax               -2.08         357   sought recognit    2.03      15
2001–2004   deficit debt             -2.05          44   exceed hour        2.00      63
2001–2004   decent wage              -2.04         158   tribe tribal       1.96      73
2001–2004   republican continu       -2.03         263   unfund liabil      1.96     263
2001–2004   billion short            -2.02         147   suspend rule       1.94     249
2001–2004   blue dog                 -2.01         368   taken twothird     1.94      14
2001–2004   privat social            -2.00         880   like describ       1.93     225
2001–2004   red ink                  -1.99        2217   illeg alien        1.93    2610

1998–2000   unfortun republican      -3.49          19   follow prayer      4.01      92
1998–2000   cut wealthiest           -3.29          38   room russel        3.51      25
1998–2000   republican friend        -3.27          85   ago feder          2.97     580
1998–2000   wealthiest percent       -3.14         123   feder cost         2.93      39
 Period     Democrat                Coef     Count      Republican           Coef    Count

1998–2000   leadership refus        -3.01         32    increas trillion      2.70      12
1998–2000   gun safeti              -2.92        1180   unborn children       2.66     197
1998–2000   break wealthi           -2.92          23   heritag area          2.66     119
1998–2000   republican refus        -2.88        126    rule control          2.62      78
1998–2000   hispan caucus           -2.81          80   receiv testimoni      2.55      11
1998–2000   wealthiest peopl        -2.76          73   yesterday feder       2.54    1680
1998–2000   republican leadership   -2.76        1134   death tax             2.38     951
1998–2000   summer job              -2.65        1299   cost estim            2.33    1982
1998–2000   congression caucus      -2.58         329   transport meet        2.24     240
1998–2000   decent wage             -2.57          80   repeal death          2.22     119
1998–2000   gun violenc             -2.49        1708   tribe tribal          2.21      39
1998–2000   bush republican         -2.45        1090   growth govern         2.20      99
1998–2000   wealthiest american     -2.39         54    dirksen offic         2.18      29
1998–2000   reproduct health        -2.38        239    communist china       2.11     378
1998–2000   friend republican       -2.38          65   exceed hour           2.08      45
1998–2000   discharg petit          -2.36          55   defens submit         2.04      19
1998–2000   peopl color             -2.35         656   congression design    2.03      10
1998–2000   smaller class           -2.32         868   employe offic         2.02     534
1998–2000   econom educ             -2.28        380    action debat          1.98      42
1998–2000   card compani            -2.27        1128   minut control         1.97     117
1998–2000   year bush               -2.23         277   public agenc          1.94    1090
1998–2000   deep cut                -2.23         352   passeng motor         1.93      18
1998–2000   defeat previous         -2.23         195   hardearn money        1.91     274
1998–2000   urg republican          -2.22         196   militari depart       1.90      58
1998–2000   labor right             -2.22         139   feder bureaucrat      1.88     122
1998–2000   cut wealthi             -2.19         45    minut second          1.86   14492

1995–1997   decent wage             -3.18          80   follow prayer         5.18      58
1995–1997   republican friend       -3.12          57   room russel           3.56      24
1995–1997   republican refus        -3.03        137    judiciari meet        2.85      48
1995–1997   wealthiest american     -2.94         91    marriag tax           2.55      41
1995–1997   break wealthi           -2.93          67   growth govern         2.54     106
1995–1997   cost prescript          -2.83          55   percent electr        2.29     159
1995–1997   gun violenc             -2.80         407   ago feder             2.21     471
1995–1997   wealthi american        -2.75          87   transport meet        2.16     174
1995–1997   wealthiest percent      -2.70         30    receiv testimoni      2.13      24
1995–1997   children defens         -2.69         430   yesterday feder       2.10    2081
1995–1997   cut wealthiest          -2.67          18   death tax             2.07     400
1995–1997   unfortun republican     -2.66          19   communist china       2.06     354
     Period      Democrat                Coef      Count      Republican           Coef    Count

    1995–1997    democrat altern          -2.48          86   unborn child          2.05     526
    1995–1997    star war                 -2.43        2847   nativ claim           2.03      13
    1995–1997    congression caucus       -2.43         313   rule control          2.01      82
    1995–1997    summer job               -2.42        1602   passeng motor         1.98      18
    1995–1997    live wage                -2.37         334   congression design    1.97      26
    1995–1997    gun law                  -2.37         518   hardearn money        1.95     207
    1995–1997    question defeat          -2.32          20   execut agenc          1.91     117
    1995–1997    deep cut                 -2.31         701   dirksen offic         1.90      28
    1995–1997    pay prescript            -2.31          50   tax freedom           1.88     141
    1995–1997    republican leadership    -2.25        1168   largest tax           1.87     260
    1995–1997    cut educ                 -2.22         343   margin tax            1.81      49
    1995–1997    center budget            -2.22         259   suspend rule          1.80     112
    1995–1997    medicar cut              -2.19         217   salari expens         1.78     111
    1995–1997    educ cut                 -2.18         186   elimin marriag        1.77      17
    1995–1997    medicaid cut             -2.16         131   emerg requir          1.77      33
    1995–1997    wage worker              -2.11        207    partialbirth abort    1.76    1689
    1995–1997    peopl color              -2.10         460   inform pleas          1.75     299
    1995–1997    tax break                -2.10        6327   present law           1.74     153


Notes: Top 30 most partisan bigrams for Democrats and Republicans, along with their estimated
partisan coefficients and their frequency across newspaper articles during the period, based on each
model per period. Procedural bigrams were filtered out.
   Figure B.1: Wordcloud of top partisan bigrams over 2005-2008 - Fontsize represents frequency


Notes: Most partisan bigrams for Democrats (blue) and Republicans (red) across newspapers during
the period 2005–2008. We restrict the computation to the top 1,000 most partisan bigrams: font size
represents the relative frequency of each bigram in the newspaper corpus, with larger text indicating
higher occurrence. Procedural bigrams have been filtered out.
B.6. Distribution of Slant Across Newspapers
   Figure B.2 shows the distribution of the slant measure (unstandardized) for the 718
newspapers in our main sample.

                                       Figure B.2: Distribution of Slant Across Newspapers
                                                                    Fox News Channel
                  Absolute Frequency
                100       0     200


                                       0         .2          .4          .6            .8    1
                                                            Newspaper Slant

Notes: Histogram of newspaper-level predictions. The figure shows the absolute frequency (unique
newspaper counts) against the average, non-standardized estimated slant value for newspapers. The
vertical line shows the average slant in FNC transcripts (at 0.48).
B.7. Example Articles by Partisan Slant

                Table B.4: Newspaper articles with the strongest Republican partisanship

Daily News (KY), March 15, 2006
Partisanship coefficient: 2.96
Letters
Special Sections Advertising Links Letters. Medical liability reform never had a chance. Your article, March
4, "Medical liability bill fails," was unsurprising. Expecting real medical liability tort reform from a legislature
controlled by lawyers is ludicrous. Also predictable were local lawyers’ defenses of our current lawyers’ paradise.
Exceptional cases (like penis removal) are presented, with suggestions that lawyers only cost (greedy) insurance
[. . . ]
Lincoln Journal Star: Web Edition (NE), January 19, 2005
Partisanship coefficient: 2.92
Bill highlights fetal pain issue
Women who seek late-term abortions would automatically get information telling them that the unborn child
can feel pain and asking if they want the fetus to have anesthesia during the abortion process, under a bill
sponsored by Lincoln Sen. Mike Foley. Foley said LB752 is based on a growing body of evidence that an unborn
child of 20 weeks, and perhaps younger, can feel pain. The bill is modeled after the federal "fetal pain awareness
act" that has been introduced in [. . . ]
Chattanooga Times Free Press (TN), March 18, 2005
Partisanship coefficient: 2.50
What about the lives it saves?
The United Nations, ever on the lookout for ways to condemn Israel, has come up with a new plan of attack.
It already has condemned the security wall Israel is building to keep out Palestinian suicide bombers, and the
U.N. World Court has said Israel has to tear down the wall - regardless of the nation’s justified concerns about
security. Now, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan says the United Nations will keep a careful accounting of all
the supposed harm that comes to [. . . ]
The Wichita Eagle (KS), September 2, 2005
Partisanship coefficient: 2.46
Blogatorial: excerpts from our web log
Allergic to tax hikes - and proud of it It will surprise no one who follows the Statehouse that the Wichita-area
delegation includes some of the Kansas Taxpayers Network’s best-loved legislators. In the Wichita-based group’s
2005 legislative ratings, perfect 100 percent scores were accorded Republican Sens. Phil Journey of Haysville and
Peggy Palmer of Augusta. The House standouts, with ratings of 105, included Reps. Bonnie Huy of Wichita,
Dick Kelsey of Goddard, Steve Huebert of Valley [. . . ]
The Deseret News (UT), February 13, 2005
Partisanship coefficient: 1.90
No licenses for illegals
I just finished reading the headlines in the Deseret Morning News (Feb. 10) and could not believe my eyes.
"Senators target license abuses," with a sub-head "Utah leaders seeking a new type of driving privilege for illegal
aliens." Why in the world are our illustrious legislators seeking to create any privilege for people who are illegally
in this country? It would seem to me they should be seeking solutions and means for identifying them and then
deporting them. From the numbers [. . . ]
Notes: Examples among the top 10,000 Republican-leaning articles for the period 2005-2008. The
partisanship coefficient here refers to article-level partisanship.
                Table B.5: Newspaper articles with the strongest Democrat partisanship

Roanoke Times (VA), February 24, 2006
Partisanship coefficient: -3.55
Don’t gag doctors about gun safety
Doctors should make a deal with the General Assembly: Physicians won’t attempt to legislate if legislators quit
trying to practice medicine. A bill that would gag pediatricians who discuss gun safety with the parents of
their patients passed the Virginia House of Delegates last week, and is under consideration in the Senate. Gun
ownership is just one issue pediatricians bring up with parents when going over safety checklists during their
children’s routine checkups. [. . . ]
Belleville News-Democrat (IL), December 4, 2005
Partisanship coefficient: -2.48
Dean: Democrats favor get-out-of-Iraq plan
Chairman says party unified around idea By Steve Thomma Knight Ridder DASH: - PHOENIX — Democrats
are starting to unify behind a get-out-of-Iraq strategy that would urge the redeployment of U.S. troops to other
countries in the Mideast or elsewhere, party Chairman Howard Dean said Saturday. The Democrats now have
vision around [. . . ]
The St. Augustine Record (FL), August 16, 2006
Partisanship coefficient: -2.45
Letter: Welcome to Wonderland
Editor: Be afraid. Be very afraid. The lunatics have taken over the asylum and they’ve stolen all the guns.
Israel’s mass slaughter of Lebanese civilians, a minor mirror image of Bush’s "untidy" occupation of Iraq, is
only the latest installment of what the right-wing extremists believe is going to be our future, if they can help
it, of "unending war." After all, somebody has to keep the weapons industry productive. It is one of the few
businesses we haven’t moved out of the [. . . ]
Lincoln Journal Star: Web Edition (NE), February 7, 2005
Partisanship coefficient: -2.33
Protesters carry on without foes
AFL-CIO members on Tuesday were ready to vent their frustrations at Edward Jones. Dozens gathered outside
the brokerage house’s North Ridge Shopping Center office with signs reading "Hands off my Social Security."
Ken Mass, president of the Nebraska AFL-CIO, said the protesters, mostly blue-collar workers from across the
state, came to show displeasure at what it describes as Edward D. Jones & Co.’s support for the privatization
of Social Security. But the office was closed [. . . ]
The Oklahoman (OK), February 3, 2008
Partisanship coefficient: -2.28
Author says taxpayers foot bill for wealthy Americans’ riches
We have always heard there is no such thing as a free lunch, and the author agrees with this with one exception:
the very wealthy who benefit from government subsidies and handouts paid for by the taxpayers. In "Free
Lunch: How the Wealthiest Americans Enrich Themselves at Government Expense, and Stick You With the
Bill" (Portfolio, $24.95), David Cay Johnston writes that government benefits and subsidies are available only
to corporations and those people rich enough to own a large [. . . ]
Notes: Examples among the top 10,000 Democrat-leaning articles for the period 2005-2008. The
partisanship coefficient here refers to article-level partisanship.
B.8. Removal of Routine Announcements
   Before aggregating the article slant at the newspaper level, we remove content related
to routine announcements: births, deaths, obituaries, weddings, and notices of sale under
power. While many of these announcements are correctly labeled as non-partisan, there
are still false positives (e.g., through mentions of healthcare) that would make them
false-positive regarding partisanship. At the newspaper level, the correlation is 0.95
when we compare the slant constructed with and without the routine announcements.
In line with this, Appendix C.6 shows that our results are almost identical when not
dropping those announcements.
   We apply this filtering to both article titles and paragraph content using string matching. For titles, we exclude articles containing terms like “death notice” and “obituary”.
For paragraph content, we implement a more extensive filtering system that accounts for
various formulations, including specific hospital records, yearly compilations (1997-2000),
and funeral notices. Table B.6 presents the complete filtering criteria.
              Table B.6: Routine Announcement Filtering Criteria

Field     Filter Criteria
          Contains: “death notice”
          Contains: “obituaries”
Title     Contains: “obituary”
          Contains: “notice of sale under power”
          Exact match: “births”
          Starts with: “births”
          Starts with: “deaths”
          Starts with: “rcal-births”
          Starts with: “local births”
          Starts with: “local deaths”
          Starts with: “all births below were recorded”
          Starts with: “all deaths below were recorded”
          Starts with: “these births were recorded at”
          Contains: “listing of births”
Paragraph Contains: “listing of deaths”
          Contains: “birth announcements”
          Contains: “announcements about births/deaths”
          Contains: “hospital notes”
          Contains: “[year] births”
          Contains: “funeral service”
          Contains: “funeral home”
          Contains: “michigan monroe county births”
          Contains: “hospital births”
          Contains: “wedding announcements”
          Contains: “special sections advertising links neighbors births”
B.9. Local Newspapers Classification
       To build a supervised classification model for predicting whether an article is local or
non-local, we created a labeled dataset using GPT-3.5-Turbo with the following prompt:
“You are given an article snippet, and your task is to determine if it is related to local
news. Respond with ’local’ or ’non-local’.”
       We randomly selected and labeled 100,000 newspaper articles published between
1995 and 2008. Afterward, the articles were cleaned using the methodology described in
Section B.1, this time forming unigrams (one-word phrases). We exclusively kept wellformatted GPT answers (either ’local’ or ’non-local’), resulting in a dataset of 99,945
preprocessed and labeled articles, with 58.8% of them classified as local.
       We split this labeled dataset into a training (80%) and a test set (20%) to train
a logistic regression model on TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency)
unigrams extracted from the cleaned articles, with a maximum of 10,000 features selected based on term frequency. TF-IDF quantifies a word’s significance by weighting its
frequency in a specific newspaper snippet against its rarity across the entire newspaper
training corpus. Our model’s results on the 19,989 test articles – 58.8% of which were
labeled as local by GPT – achieved an accuracy of 81%, an F1 score of 84%, precision
of 83%, and recall of 86%. We validated our approach via blind human annotations of
2,108 newspaper article snippets, 72% of which were labeled as local by humans.29 Our
classifier achieves an accuracy of 77%, an F1 score of 82%, precision of 92%, and recall
of 75% on the human-labeled data. Table B.7 shows the most significant unigrams for
predicting local articles. We use this well-validated model to label the articles from our
main analysis. 64.4% articles are labeled as local.30
     We recruited the annotators on Upwork. The annotators were instructed to read the newspaper
article snippet and to decide whether it covered local or non-local news.
     In the summary statistics (Table A.2), we show a slightly different share since that one is the average
of the local share across newspapers.
                   Table B.7: Most Predictive Unigrams for Local Classification

                           Local          Coef       Non-local    Coef
                           local          10.71      dear         -4.45
                           counti         10.03      fy           -3.93
                           polic           5.87      american     -3.77
                           area            5.84      bush         -3.63
                           communiti       5.42      china        -3.59
                           gov             5.18      ny           -3.58
                           downtown        5.14      french       -3.54
                           citi            5.12      calif        -3.44
                           resid           4.88      british      -3.38
                           council         4.31      york         -3.35
                           mayor           4.13      germani      -3.23
                           town            4.06      movi         -3.18
                           superintend     3.85      marri        -3.16
                           student         3.66      global       -3.14
                           park            3.59      investor     -3.11
                           school          3.56      european     -3.04
                           said            3.56      world        -3.01
                           herald          3.39      nation       -2.98
                           north           3.23      engag        -2.92
                           center          3.16      nyse         -2.90
                           airport         3.15      type         -2.85
                           township        3.13      date         -2.81
                           street          3.06      network      -2.78
                           librari         3.02      nfl          -2.77
                           staff           3.01      nba          -2.66
                           locat           3.00      america      -2.65
                           roanok          2.99      ep           -2.61
                           region          2.89      fla          -2.60
                           chamber         2.88      billion      -2.58
                           event           2.83      washington   -2.56
Notes: Top 30 most predictive bigrams for classifying newspaper articles as ’Local’ or ’Non-local,’
along with their estimated predictive coefficients.
C. Results Appendix

C.1. First Stage Results
       Appendix Table C.1 shows the first stage results, i.e., the association between the
FNC channel position and FNC viewership (see the upper panel). The lower panel looks
at the MSNBC position and MSNBC viewership.
       In both panels, column (1) does not include controls, only census division fixed
effects. Column (2) adds demographic controls (see Appendix Table A.2 for details).
This leads the first stage to become statistically significant, and the Kleinbergen-Paap
cluster-robust first-stage F-statistic increases more than fourfold. In column (3), we add
channel controls, further increasing the coefficient estimate and the F statistic for both
panels.
       Columns (4) to (6) mirror columns (1) to (3) but always include state instead of census
fixed effects. The same pattern emerges: Both the coefficient estimates and especially
the F statistics increase as we add the controls. Census division and state fixed effects
result in similar estimates regarding size, significance, and F statistic. Therefore, we will
concentrate on specifications along columns (5) and (6) for our main results and show
the results for census fixed effects as a robustness check.
       For FNC viewership, our preferred specification (column 6, with state fixed effects and
all controls) implies that a one-standard-deviation increase in the FNC channel position
decreases viewership by 19% of a standard deviation. The Kleinbergen-Paap clusterrobust first-stage F-statistic amounts to around 15, rendering our first stage relevant.31
The F statistic is small when using MSNBC as a predictor of FNC viewership; and it is
also smaller with both FNC and MSNBC as instruments compared to FNC alone. We
will thus use the FNC channel position as an instrument and the MSNBC position as a
control (unless otherwise specified in robustness checks).
       For the viewership of the MSNBC channel, the coefficient of its position amounts to
only to roughly -0.04 (while also being significant). Our paper largely focuses on the role
of FNC in shifting newspaper slant (and only briefly discusses that MSNBC viewership
does not have a robustly detectable effect on newspaper slant in Section 5).
    Notice that our F-statistic is smaller than Martin and Yurukoglu’s (circa 15 in our preferred specification versus 39 in their preferred specification on p. 2576, Table 2, column 3). This fact aligns with us
studying the relationship of the channel position and viewership at the county level. In contrast, their
observations are at the zip code level; they, thus, draw on more variation (and a bigger sample).
                     Table C.1: First Stage: Cable TV Position Effects on Viewership


                                                          Fox News Viewership
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)

Fox News Channel Pos.              -0.098 -0.142***        -0.173*** -0.104 -0.152*** -0.185***
                                  (0.068)    (0.046)          (0.044) (0.081)  (0.051)   (0.048)
MSNBC Channel Pos.                                             0.043                             0.040
                                                             (0.026)                           (0.027)

Observations                          718           718          718        718          718       718
K-P F-Stat FNC                       2.09          9.51        15.61       1.63         9.01     14.70
K-P F-Stat MSNBC                                                2.80                              2.15
K-P F-Stat FNC & MSNBC                                          8.57                              9.55


                                                          MSNBC Viewership
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)

MSNBC Channel Pos.                 -0.026 -0.039***        -0.044*** -0.019       -0.037*** -0.041***
                                  (0.018)    (0.011)          (0.010) (0.022)        (0.011)   (0.011)
Fox News Channel Pos.                                      0.035***                              0.007
                                                             (0.011)                           (0.019)

Observations                          718          718           718       718          718        718
K-P F-Stat FNC                                                 10.63                              0.13
K-P F-Stat MSNBC                     2.11        11.55         18.17       0.73        10.84     13.01
K-P F-Stat FNC & MSNBC                                         14.66                              7.02
Census Div. Fixed Effects               ✓            ✓            ✓
State Fixed Effects                                                          ✓            ✓         ✓
Demographic Controls                                 ✓            ✓                       ✓         ✓
Channel Controls                                                  ✓                                 ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. The upper panel shows regressions of Fox
News Channel viewership on its channel position, while the lower panel shows regressions of MSNBC
viewership on its channel position. Both viewership and position variables are standardized. All
observations are weighted by circulation. Columns (1)-(3) include census division fixed effects, while
columns (4)-(6) include state fixed effects. Demographic controls and channel controls are introduced
progressively (in columns 2 and 3 or 5 and 6, respectively). The Kleinbergen-Paap cluster-robust firststage F-statistics are shown for the Fox News position, the MSNBC position, and both jointly. All
controls are listed in Appendix A.4. We cluster standard errors at the state level (in parentheses; ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
C.2. Instrument Exogeneity
   This Section follows Ash and Galletta (2023). It demonstrates that our instrument is
unrelated to demographic characteristics that predict news channel viewership or newspaper slant preferences. We use linear regressions with all our demographic and channel
system characteristics (see Appendix Table A.2) and state fixed effects as variables to
predict viewership and newspaper slant. Specifically, we generate predictions for the
endogenous regressor (viewership) and the outcome (the newspaper slant). These predictions capture the variation in viewership and news content due to pre-existing social,
economic, and political county characteristics.

          Table C.2: Identification Checks: Fox News Position Correlation with Covariates


                                                          Predictions for:
                                                                           Republican
                                          Fox News Viewership            Newspaper Slant
                                                                  (1)                      (2)

         Fox News Channel Position                              0.006                  -0.004
                                                              (0.054)                 (0.018)

         Observations                                             718                     718
         State Fixed Effects                                        ✓                       ✓
         Demographic Controls
         Channel Controls
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. The
main explanatory variable is FNC’s position (standardized). The outcomes are predictions: Fox News
Channel viewership (column 1) and Republican newspaper slant (column 2). Both predicted outcomes
are generated using demographic and channel system characteristics and state fixed effects. All specifications include state fixed effects. Appendix A.4 lists all control variables. We weight observations
by circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1).


   Appendix Table C.2 summarizes this identification check. We regress the predicted
FNC viewership (column 1) and the predicted newspaper slant (column 2) on the position of FNC. None of the columns include demographic or channel controls (since those
were used to predict the respective outcome). None of the columns show any significant relationship between the FNC position and the outcome. Overall, these results
suggest that the channel positions capture variation that is not associated with county
characteristics that are otherwise important for our endogenous regressor or outcome.
C.3. OLS Results
       Table C.3 shows OLS results for regressions of newspaper slant on FNC viewership.
       The upper panel of the table looks at our main sample of newspapers. In column (1),
we include no explanatory variables except FNC viewership (and state fixed effects). The
viewership coefficient is marginally statistically significant (p<0.1). If the viewership of
FNC increases by one standard deviation in a newspaper’s county, its slant becomes more
Republican by 0.13 standard deviations. This effect is smaller than our 2SLS estimate.
While obvious confounders could lead to the 2SLS estimate being different from the OLS
estimate (e.g., counties with pre-existing pro-Republican policy views tend to have both
higher FNC viewership and more conservatively slanted newspapers), measurement error
in the FNC viewership variable could lead to attenuation bias in the OLS estimates. The
viewership coefficient becomes insignificant and smaller in the remaining three columns
(2 to 4), where we introduce demographic, channel, and newspaper language controls.
The coefficient size hovers around 0.07 to 0.10.
       The likely role of measurement error becomes apparent when examining a subsample
of newspapers we use in robustness checks: those with more than 1,000 articles. For those
outlets, we find larger and more precisely estimated effects: the OLS coefficient is 0.18
(significant at the 5% level) without controls. It remains stable around 0.15 (and significant) after adding all controls. Focusing on this subsample likely leads to more precise
slant estimates. Also, importantly, a newspaper’s number of articles is correlated with
the number of Nielsen respondents in its county (specifically, newspapers with >1000
articles tend to serve counties with respondent numbers that are 0.14 standard deviations higher). With higher respondent numbers, viewership is measured more precisely.
Hence, our results are consistent with the instrumental variables addressing measurement error, while the OLS estimates may suffer from attenuation bias.32 Notably, this
stark difference between the full sample and the >1000 articles sample appears only in
OLS, not in our 2SLS estimates. Hence, overall, we interpret our OLS results as lending
credence to our slant measure.
       This interpretation is further supported by looking at the channel access variables.
    In line with this intuition, we obtain results highly similar to the lower panel of Table C.3 when we
reduce the sample by dropping counties with the lowest Nielsen respondent numbers until we obtain a
similar sample size (i.e., around 540). This similar sample size is obtained by dropping counties with
Nielsen respondent numbers below the 25th percentile. Our main results are, if anything, stronger when
using that sample in robustness checks (see Appendix Section C.9).
In both samples, the coefficients consistently align with the expected ideological leanings
of the channels: the share of households with access to FNC shows a positive association
with Republican slant, while MSNBC access shows a negative coefficient.
   Even when focusing on newspapers with more than 1,000 articles, the OLS estimates
remain substantially smaller than our 2SLS estimates (by a factor of two or three). This
suggests that the larger 2SLS estimates likely reflect heterogeneous treatment effects:
newspapers that change their slant in response to our instrument (the compliers) may
be particularly susceptible to FNC influence. A similar argument about heterogeneous
treatment effects among compliers is made by Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) in their
study of FNC effects on voting behavior. We discuss this argument in our context in
more detail in Section 5.1.
                 Table C.3: OLS: Fox News Viewership Effects on Newspaper Slant


                                                                     Republican
                                                                   Newspaper Slant
                                                                     All Outlets
                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)

      Fox News Channel Viewership                         0.128*      0.097        0.071      0.088
                                                         (0.074)    (0.079)      (0.083)    (0.068)
      Households with FNC Access [Share]                                           3.004      2.243
                                                                                 (2.566)    (1.944)
      Households with MSNBC Access [Share]                                        -2.639    -2.226*
                                                                                 (1.720)    (1.279)

      Observations                                          718         718          718         718


                                                                    Republican
                                                                Newspaper Slant
                                                              Outlets > 1000 Articles
                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)

      Fox News Channel Viewership                        0.179**   0.156***    0.145***     0.124**
                                                         (0.072)     (0.050)     (0.053)    (0.053)
      Households with FNC Access [Share]                                           0.978      0.769
                                                                                 (0.761)    (0.693)
      Households with MSNBC Access [Share]                                        -0.505     -0.349
                                                                                 (0.410)    (0.359)

      Observations                                          540         540          540         540
      State Fixed Effects                                     ✓           ✓            ✓          ✓
      Demographic Controls                                                ✓            ✓          ✓
      Channel Controls                                                                 ✓          ✓
      Newspaper Language Controls                                                                 ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. The
upper panel includes all newspapers, while the lower panel restricts to newspapers with more than
1,000 articles. The main explanatory variable is Fox News channel viewership. The outcome is the
newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles
among all articles. All specifications include state fixed effects. Demographic controls, channel controls,
and generic language controls are introduced progressively in columns (2)-(4). Appendix A.4 lists all
control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state level
(in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
C.4. Reduced Form Results
   Appendix Table C.4 presents reduced-form results in tabular format. It shows the
effects of the standardized FNC channel position on newspaper slant (also standardized).
In column (1), we include state fixed effects and demographic controls. In column (2),
we add channel controls. In column (3), we additionally include controls for generic
newspaper language features (see Appendix Table A.2 for details on the different types
of controls). The coefficient estimates are similar across the three columns and imply
the following: When the FNC channel position increases by one standard deviation
(which corresponds to around 11 positions), newspaper slant becomes less Republican
by roughly 0.09 standard deviations (notice that the coefficient sign is reversed compared
to the 2SLS because we are looking at the position and not viewership here).
   In column (2), we introduce the MSNBC position as a regressor along with the
channel controls. The MSNBC position coefficient comes with a positive sign (suggesting
that easier accessibility of MSNBC leads to more Democrat-leaning content). That effect
is not robustly significant.
                Table C.4: Reduced Form: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Position


                                                            Republican
                                                          Newspaper Slant
                                                           (1)          (2)         (3)

               Fox News Channel Position           -0.111***     -0.091***    -0.094**
                                                      (0.027)       (0.031)    (0.046)
               MSNBC Channel Position                              0.057**       0.018
                                                                   (0.028)     (0.024)

               Observations                               718          718         718
               State Fixed Effects                          ✓            ✓           ✓
               Demographic Controls                         ✓            ✓           ✓
               Channel Controls                                          ✓           ✓
               Newspaper Language Controls                                           ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using OLS. The main explanatory variable is the Fox News channel position
(standardized). The outcome is the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the
share of Republican-leaning articles among all articles. All specifications include state fixed effects
and demographic controls. Additionally, column (2) includes channel controls; column (3) further
adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4 lists all control variables. We weight observations by
circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1).
C.5. MSNBC Results
   Table C.5 replicates Table 1 but focuses on instrumented MSNBC viewership instead
of instrumented FNC viewership. As in Table 1, all columns include state fixed effects.
The first column includes demographic controls. The second column also adds channel
controls, and the third column further controls for generic newspaper language controls
(see Appendix Table A.2 for details).
   In all columns, the coefficients come with the expected negative sign – higher MSNBC
viewership implies less Republican slant. For example, in terms of magnitude, the third
column suggests that newspaper slant is 0.43 standard deviations more Democrat if
MSNBC viewership increases by one standard deviation.
   For MSNBC (relative to FNC in Table 1), the effect’s size varies more across columns
and are only weakly significant in column (2).


                    Table C.5: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership


                                                              Republican
                                                            Newspaper Slant
                                                            (1)        (2)        (3)

                   MSNBC Viewership                      -1.158    -1.404*    -0.426
                                                        (0.847)    (0.766)   (0.578)

                   Observations                             718        718       718
                   K-P First-Stage F-Stat                 10.84      13.01     14.13
                   State Fixed Effects                        ✓         ✓          ✓
                   Demographic Controls                       ✓         ✓          ✓
                   Channel Controls                                     ✓          ✓
                   Newspaper Language Controls                                     ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is MSNBC
channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). The outcome is the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles among
all articles. All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally, column (2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4
lists all control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We cluster standard errors at the
state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
C.6. Robustness: Slant Measurement
   Appendix Table C.6 mirrors Table 1 but varies the outcome. In the main results, the
outcome measures a newspaper’s slant as the share of articles classified as Republican
over the total of articles. Now, in Table C.6, slant is the share of Republican articles over
partisan articles: We divide the number of Republican articles by that of articles that
are either Republican or Democrat. The results are almost identical to the main results,
supporting the conclusion that our effects measure not merely a shift to Congress-like
language (e.g., national politics) but, indeed, Republican over Democrat slant.

                     Table C.6: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                        Robustness: Slant Only Relative to Partisan Articles


                                                                Republican
                                                            Newspaper Slant
                                                          Partisan Articles Only
                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)

                  Fox News Channel Viewership            0.702**    0.424**    0.558***
                                                         (0.318)    (0.204)      (0.206)

                  Observations                               717        717          717
                  K-P First-Stage F-Stat                    8.99      14.69        15.04
                  State Fixed Effects                         ✓           ✓            ✓
                  Demographic Controls                        ✓           ✓            ✓
                  Channel Controls                                        ✓            ✓
                  Newspaper Language Controls                                          ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox
News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). This table is a
robustness check, and the outcome is the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized) but measured
as the share of Republican-leaning articles among all partisan articles (instead of all articles as in Table
1). All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally, column (2)
includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4 lists all
control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state level
(in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).


   Consistent with this, Table C.7 shows no significant effects and negative coefficient
signs when the outcome is Democrat slant (i.e., the number of Democrat articles over a
newspaper’s entire article count). In Table C.8, we average all articles’ raw slant scores
(i.e., without first dichotomizing them into Republican and Democrat articles) to obtain
the newspaper-level slant. Again, qualitatively similar results emerge. These alternative
measures are defined in Section 3.3.
                    Table C.7: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                                   Robustness: Democrat Slant


                                                              Democrat
                                                            Newspaper Slant
                                                             (1)       (2)        (3)

                   Fox News Channel Viewership           -0.365     -0.019    -0.199
                                                        (0.347)    (0.185)   (0.185)

                   Observations                             718        718       718
                   K-P First-Stage F-Stat                  9.01      14.70     15.06
                   State Fixed Effects                        ✓         ✓          ✓
                   Demographic Controls                       ✓         ✓          ✓
                   Channel Controls                                     ✓          ✓
                   Newspaper Language Controls                                     ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox
News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). This table is a
robustness check, and the outcome is the newspaper’s Democrat slant (standardized) (instead of its
Republican slant as in Table 1). All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls.
Additionally, column (2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls.
Appendix A.4 lists all control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We cluster standard
errors at the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).


   Next, Appendix Table C.9 excludes outlets with less than a total of 1000 articles
between 2005 and 2008 available on the NewsLibrary. This check rules out that our results are driven by observations with low article numbers, which might lead to spuriously
extreme slant values (given the typical noisiness of text data measures). Finally, Table
C.10 is based on newspaper slant measures where we do not drop routine announcements
(e.g., birth and death announcements; see Section B.8 for details). We still recover our
results with similar coefficients.
                    Table C.8: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                             Robustness: Slant as Sum of Raw Scores


                                                             Republican
                                                           Newspaper Slant
                                                           Average of Score
                                                            (1)       (2)        (3)

                  Fox News Channel Viewership           0.656*      0.310   0.415**
                                                       (0.341)    (0.191)   (0.192)

                  Observations                             718        718        718
                  K-P First-Stage F-Stat                  9.01      14.70      15.06
                  State Fixed Effects                        ✓         ✓          ✓
                  Demographic Controls                       ✓         ✓          ✓
                  Channel Controls                                     ✓          ✓
                  Newspaper Language Controls                                     ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox News
channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). This table is a robustness
check, and the outcome is the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized) but measured as the average
of the raw partisanship score of all articles (instead of the share of Republican-leaning articles as in
Table 1). All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally, column
(2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4 lists
all control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state
level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
                    Table C.9: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                             Robustness: Outlets with ≥ 1000 Articles


                                                             Republican
                                                          Newspaper Slant
                                                         Outlets ≥ 1000 Art.
                                                           (1)        (2)        (3)

                  Fox News Channel Viewership           0.456*   0.550**     0.481*
                                                       (0.248)   (0.236)    (0.261)

                  Observations                             541        541       541
                  K-P First-Stage F-Stat                  8.78      12.13     11.53
                  State Fixed Effects                       ✓          ✓          ✓
                  Demographic Controls                      ✓          ✓          ✓
                  Channel Controls                                     ✓          ✓
                  Newspaper Language Controls                                     ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. This
is a robustness check, and we drop newspapers with less than 1000 articles in 2005-08. All estimates
are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox News channel
viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). The outcome is the newspaper’s
Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles among all articles. All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally, column (2)
includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4 lists all
control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state level
(in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
                   Table C.10: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                  Robustness: Keeping Routine Announcements (e.g., Obituaries)


                                                              Republican
                                                            Newspaper Slant
                                                              All Articles
                                                            (1)         (2)        (3)

                 Fox News Channel Viewership            0.596**   0.449***    0.470**
                                                        (0.262)     (0.164)   (0.195)

                 Observations                               718         718        718
                 K-P First-Stage F-Stat                    9.01       14.70      15.06
                 State Fixed Effects                         ✓           ✓           ✓
                 Demographic Controls                        ✓           ✓           ✓
                 Channel Controls                                        ✓           ✓
                 Newspaper Language Controls                                         ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox
News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). The outcome is
the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles
among all articles. This is a robustness check, and we do not drop routine announcements (e.g.,
death notices) before aggregating slant at the newspaper level (as we do in Table 1). All specifications
include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally, column (2) includes channel controls;
column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4 lists all control variables. We weight
observations by circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
C.7. Robustness: Circulation and Weighting
   Table C.11 replicates the main results from Table 1 but weights each observation
by the newspaper’s circulation in the pre-FNC era (specifically, circulation in 1996).
All coefficients remain qualitatively similar. Hence, our main results are not driven by
potential circulation changes due to cable news exposure. Notice that we lose roughly
100 observations in this robustness check because, for these outlets, circulation data for
1996 is unavailable.
                    Table C.11: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                                 Robustness: Historical Circulation


                                                              Republican
                                                            Newspaper Slant
                                                             (1)        (2)        (3)

                   Fox News Channel Viewership           0.832*     0.461*     0.450*
                                                        (0.445)    (0.243)    (0.229)

                   Observations                              608       608        608
                   K-P First-Stage F-Stat                   5.67     10.11      10.35
                   State Fixed Effects                        ✓          ✓          ✓
                   Demographic Controls                       ✓          ✓          ✓
                   Channel Controls                                      ✓          ✓
                   Newspaper Language Controls                                      ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox
News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). The outcome is
the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles
among all articles. All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally,
column (2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix
A.4 lists all control variables. This is a robustness check of Table 1, and we weight observations by
1996 circulation here (instead of contemporary circulation for 2005-08). We cluster standard errors at
the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).


   Next, Table C.12 shows robustness to using relative weights. That is, each newspaper’s circulation is calculated as its market share in the county (based on our circulation
data) times the county population. Hence, this exercise takes a county-level perspective:
based on the county FNC viewership, how does the county-level newspaper landscape
react? Again, the results remain similar; they become even slightly larger and more
significant.
                    Table C.12: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                                  Robustness: Relative Circulation


                                                              Republican
                                                            Newspaper Slant
                                                            (1)         (2)         (3)

                  Fox News Channel Viewership           0.708**   0.592**     0.625***
                                                        (0.323)   (0.222)       (0.228)

                  Observations                              718        718          718
                  K-P First-Stage F-Stat                   8.90      17.50        17.60
                  State Fixed Effects                        ✓           ✓           ✓
                  Demographic Controls                       ✓           ✓           ✓
                  Channel Controls                                       ✓           ✓
                  Newspaper Language Controls                                        ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox
News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). The outcome is
the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles
among all articles. All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally,
column (2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4
lists all control variables. This is a robustness check of Table 1, and we weight observations by their
relative circulation in the county here (instead of absolute newspaper-level circulation). We cluster
standard errors at the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
C.8. Robustness: Fox News Relative to MSNBC Viewership
   Appendix Table C.13 replicates Table 1 but focuses on FNC viewership relative to
MSNBC viewership. To this end, the endogenous variable is constructed as FNC viewership minus MSNBC viewership. Along these lines, the instrument is FNC channel
position minus MSNBC channel position. We find effects similar to the main results,
with slightly higher coefficient sizes.

                   Table C.13: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                      Robustness: Fox News Relative to MSNBC Viewership


                                                              Republican
                                                            Newspaper Slant
                                                            (1)         (2)        (3)

                FNC Viewership ...                     1.088***    0.875***    0.916**
                ... relative to MSNBC                    (0.384)     (0.305)   (0.410)

                Observations                                718         718        718
                K-P First-Stage F-Stat                    16.96       10.72      10.66
                State Fixed Effects                           ✓           ✓         ✓
                Demographic Controls                          ✓           ✓         ✓
                Channel Controls                                          ✓         ✓
                Newspaper Language Controls                                         ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is the Fox
News channel viewership relative to the MSNBC viewership instrumented with the relative distance
between the Fox News and the MSNBC channel positions (standardized). The outcome is the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles among all
articles. All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally, column
(2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4 lists
all control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state
level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
C.9. Robustness: Miscellaneous
   Table C.14 demonstrates robustness to dropping counties with few Nielsen respondents. In these counties, the viewership is likely imprecisely measured; see discussion
in Section C.3. As we would expect, our effects become more precisely estimated when
dropping these counties and, if anything, bigger.

                  Table C.14: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
               Robustness: Dropping Counties with Low Nielsen Respondent Number


                                                             Republican
                                                           Newspaper Slant
                                                           (1)         (2)         (3)

                 Fox News Channel Viewership           0.776**   0.656***    0.657***
                                                       (0.316)     (0.222)     (0.216)

                 Observations                              558        558          558
                 K-P First-Stage F-Stat                   7.38      13.96        14.50
                 State Fixed Effects                        ✓           ✓           ✓
                 Demographic Controls                       ✓           ✓           ✓
                 Channel Controls                                       ✓           ✓
                 Newspaper Language Controls                                        ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. This
is a robustness check of Table 1 where we drop counties with few Nielsen survey respondents (below the 25th percentile). All estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main
explanatory variable is Fox News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). The outcome is the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of
Republican-leaning articles among all articles. All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally, column (2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic
language controls. Appendix A.4 lists all control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We
cluster standard errors at the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).


   Table C.15 shows that our results are robust to census division instead of state fixed
effects. Table C.16 shows that our results remain robust when we use robust standard
errors without clustering.
   Furthermore, we conduct leave-one-out analyses at the state level. The results demonstrate stability: when excluding states (Figure C.1) one at a time from our 2SLS specification (we use Table 1’s column 2), the estimated coefficients fall within a range of 0.40
to 0.60 (see left panel of the figure). These coefficients maintain statistical significance
across iterations, as shown by the p-values concentrated near zero (see right panel).
Our findings are not driven by any single state and, hence, by extension, an individual
newspaper.


                    Table C.15: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                             Robustness: Census Division Fixed Effects


                                                                Republican
                                                              Newspaper Slant
                                                              (1)          (2)        (3)

                 Fox News Channel Viewership             0.782***    0.658***    0.466**
                                                           (0.267)     (0.196)   (0.177)

                 Observations                                 718         718         718
                 K-P First-Stage F-Stat                      9.51       15.61       17.07
                 Census Division Fixed Effects                  ✓           ✓           ✓
                 Demographic Controls                           ✓           ✓           ✓
                 Channel Controls                                           ✓           ✓
                 Newspaper Language Controls                                            ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox
News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). The outcome is
the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles
among all articles. All specifications include census division fixed effects (as a robustness check of Table
1 where we use state fixed effects) and demographic controls. Additionally, column (2) includes channel
controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4 lists all control variables.
We weight observations by circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state level (in parentheses;
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).
                    Table C.16: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                                Robustness: Robust Standard Errors


                                                            Newspaper Slant
                                                             (1)        (2)        (3)

                   Fox News Channel Viewership           0.718*     0.492*    0.515**
                                                        (0.368)    (0.267)    (0.257)

                   Observations                             718        718        718
                   State Fixed Effects                        ✓          ✓          ✓
                   Demographic Controls                       ✓          ✓          ✓
                   Channel Controls                                      ✓          ✓
                   Newspaper Language Controls                                      ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox
News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). The outcome is
the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the share of Republican-leaning articles
among all articles. All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally,
column (2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix
A.4 lists all control variables. We weight observations by circulation. We report robust standard errors
(in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).


                    Figure C.1: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                             Robustness: Dropping States Individually


Notes: The histogram on the left shows FNC Viewership coefficients according to our preferred main
specification (Table 1, column 3), but leaving out each state once. The histogram on the right shows
the distribution of the p-values from the same regressions.
D. Mechanisms Appendix

D.1. Checks on Timing
   Figure 4 in Section 6 shows that slant changes only become detectable in 2005-2008.
Figure D.1 replicates that figure but lets the covariates vary with the period. In the main
part, we use census data from 2010. Now, for the earlier periods, we use the data from
the 2000 census. We restrict the set of controls to variables available in both periods –
this explains why the coefficient for 2005-2008 is also slightly different than in Figure 4.
We find qualitatively equivalent results in both figures.
   Figure D.2 also replicates Figure 4 but with the share of Democrat-leaning (instead
of Republican-leaning) articles as the outcome. We do not find an effect in any period.
                 Figure D.1: Reduced Form: (Historical) Republican Newspaper Slant and Fox News Position
                                           Robustness: Time-Varying Controls


                                       .4
   Reduced Form Coefficient Estimate


                                       .2
                                       -.2
                                                                     0
                                                                                                      8
                                                                 00
                                                                                                  00
                                                  -1


                                                                -2


                                                                                   -2


                                                                                                 -2
                                                            97
                                                                                             05
                                                           19
                                                                                            20


                                                                         Time Period

Notes: Reduced form coefficients with newspapers as observation units. Each coefficient is from a
separate regression mirroring the specification from Table C.4’s second column: the reduced form
with state fixed effects, as well as demographic and channel controls and observations weighted by
circulation. We use time-varying covariates (either from the 2000 or 2010 census) as a robustness
check to Figure 4. The outcome is Republican slant based on historical newspaper articles (see periods
indicated on the horizontal axis), and the underlying models to quantify slant are based on models from
historical Congress speeches. We obtain the newspaper articles from NewsLibrary only for fewer outlets
in earlier period: for 95-96, the coefficient is based on 139 newspapers, for 97-00 on 340 newspapers,
and for 01-04 on 503 (relative to 718 in our main sample). The fourth estimate is our main observation
period (05-08) but using the same sample as for 01-04 (i.e., 503) outlets.
                          Figure D.2: Reduced Form: (Historical) Democrat Newspaper Slant and Fox News Position


                                       .4
   Reduced Form Coefficient Estimate


                                       .2
                                       -.2


                                       -.4
                                                                     0
                                                                                                      8
                                                                 00
                                                                                                   00
                                                  -1


                                                                -2


                                                                                   -2


                                                                                                 -2
                                                            97
                                                                                              05
                                                           19
                                                                                            20


                                                                         Time Period

Notes: Reduced form coefficients with newspapers as observation units. Each coefficient is from a
separate regression mirroring the specification from Table C.4’s second column: the reduced form with
state fixed effects, as well as demographic and channel controls and observations weighted by circulation.
Contrary to Figure 4, the outcome is Democrat instead of Republican slant. The slant is based on
historical newspaper articles (see periods indicated on the horizontal axis), and the underlying models
to quantify slant are based on models from historical Congress speeches. We obtain the newspaper
articles from NewsLibrary only for fewer outlets in earlier period: for 95-96, the coefficient is based
on 139 newspapers, for 97-00 on 340 newspapers, and for 01-04 on 503 (relative to 718 in our main
sample). The fourth estimate is our main observation period (05-08) but using the same sample as for
01-04 (i.e., 503) outlets.
D.2. Treatment Effect Heterogeneity
   This section documents a geographical congruence: counties where the newspapers’
slant becomes more Republican in response to higher FNC exposure also tend to be
counties where the Republican vote shares increase.
   Using the method from Athey et al.’s 2019, we predict, based on county-level covariates, which counties likely see large treatment effects from the FNC instrument on
(i) their voting in 2008 and (ii) their newspapers’ slant in 2005-2008. This method is a
machine-learning approach – a causal forest – to model heterogeneous treatment effects
across treated units in response to an instrument. It allows the reduced form effect of
channel position to vary flexibly with local covariates. We train two models: The first
one for newspaper slant as the outcome and the second one with the 2008 Republican
vote share as the outcome. For this exercise, we drop counties with low numbers of
Nielsen respondents (below the 25th percentile) for better precision.
   Using the trained causal forests, we predict the treatment effects for both outcomes.
Figure D.3 shows that the predicted effect sizes for each outcome are highly correlated
across counties. The Pearson’s correlation is 0.77. Table D.1 shows the covariates most
associated with high treatment effects.
   Overall, these findings suggest that the types of counties that are persuaded by
FNC regarding voting also have newspapers that are responsive in their slant. We
interpret these descriptive results as evidence for the importance of persuasion, arguably
in particular on the demand-side.

        Table D.1: Covariates Most Associated with High Treatment Effects (County-Level)

              Strong Response of Slant Strong Response of Voting
              % Middle-aged individuals % Males in county
              % Hispanic population     % Middle-aged individuals
              % Service occupations     % Arts occupations
              % Office occupations      Median tax rate
Notes: Covariates most associated with a strong response of slant in 2005-2008 (left column) and
Republican vote shares in 2008 (right column) to the FNC channel position. The covariates were
identified using heterogeneous treatment effect estimation via instrumental variables as proposed by
Athey et al. (2019). The top-listed covariate represents the most associated one; the second covariate
is the second-most associated one, etc.
   Figure D.3: Reduced Form: Predicted Treatment Effects on Slant and Republican Votes in 2008
   Predicted Treatment Effect: Republican Votes 2008
               -.13     -.09      -.05       -.01


                                                                                                     Coef = 1.23** (.04)
                                                                                                          N = 539
     -.17


                                                       -.14       -.1             -.06              -.02               .02
                                                              Predicted Treatment Effect: Slant 2005-08

Notes: Binned scatterplot of the standardized predicted treatment effect of the FNC channel position on
Republican vote shares in 2008 (vertical axis) against the standardized predicted treatment effects of the
same instrument on newspaper slant (horizontal axis). Cross-section with newspaper-level observations
weighted by newspaper circulation. We include state fixed effects and channel controls (see Table A.2 for
the specific controls) to improve the precision of the treatment effect estimation. The demographics are
used to predict the treatment effect size. Next to the axes, we show the distributions of the underlying
variables in light gray.
D.3. Slant in Articles on Local News
       As Section 6 mentioned, our main results hold when we construct, for each newspaper,
the slant measure only with articles covering local news, as Table D.2 illustrates. Column
(1) replicates Table 1’s column (3) but with the share of local articles as the outcome.
Columns (2) to (4) replicate our main specifications (columns 1 to 3 of Table 1), but
with newspaper slant only based on articles covering local news. Appendix B.9 details
how we distinguish local from higher-level reporting. The coefficient is smaller than in
the main results, but the differences are statistically insignificant. Hence, even for local
news, we find sizeable effects.33
     When looking at non-local articles, we find an effect of similar magnitude (0.42). It is insignificant,
likely due to low observation numbers (around 1600 non-local articles per newspaper on average).
                     Table D.2: 2SLS: Newspaper Slant and Fox News Viewership
                              Mechanisms: Slant in Local News Articles


                                                                    Republican
                                                   Local          Newspaper Slant
                                                   Share           Local Articles
                                                        (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)

             Fox News Channel Viewership           -0.046     0.631**   0.383**     0.425**
                                                  (0.038)     (0.271)   (0.150)     (0.185)

             Observations                             718         718        718        718
             K-P First-Stage F-Stat                 15.06       10.59      14.70      15.06
             State Fixed Effects                         ✓         ✓           ✓          ✓
             Demographic Controls                        ✓         ✓           ✓          ✓
             Channel Controls                            ✓                     ✓          ✓
             Newspaper Language Controls                 ✓                                ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using two-stage least squares (2SLS). The main explanatory variable is Fox
News channel viewership instrumented with the channel’s position (standardized). In the first column,
the outcome is the share of articles covering local news (rather than national or international news). In
columns (2) to (4), the outcome is the newspaper’s Republican slant (standardized), measured as the
share of Republican-leaning local articles among all local articles. This is a robustness check of Table
1. Here, we only consider articles covering local news. All specifications include state fixed effects and
demographic controls. Channel controls are included in columns (1), (3) and (4); generic language
controls in columns (1) and (4). Appendix A.4 lists all control variables. We weight observations by
circulation. We cluster standard errors at the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1).
D.4. Analyses on Market Competition
   This appendix provides some suggestive evidence on whether market competition is
an important driver of our results. First, we look at circulation. Table D.3 replicates
Table C.4 but with circulation as the outcome and without circulation weights. Table D.4
repeats this exercise but additionally controls for circulation in 1996. We do not see any
effects of the FNC channel position on circulation. If counties with lower FNC channel
positions are under higher competitive pressures than counties with higher positions, we
may expect this to manifest in lower circulation.
   Second, as shown in Appendix D.3, we find similar slant effects when focusing on
local reporting only (i.e., focusing on articles covering local as opposed to national or
international news). While local and national news outlets can be competitors (e.g., over
advertising revenues as shown by Angelucci et al., 2024), there is little direct competition
from FNC over the content of local news. We hypothesize that the effect would be
different if market competition was an important driver of our results.
   Finally, from a theoretical viewpoint, conventional approaches of spatial competition,
e.g., those in the spirit of Hotelling (1929), would rather predict the left-wing shift of the
positions of existing outlets in response to an entry of a right-wing competitor due to
differentiation incentives. Consider, for example, a model by Eaton and Lipsey (1975):
multiple outlets compete exclusively over locations along [0, 1] line with uniformly distributed voters. If there were, say, four outlets before entry, in the unique equilibrium
pattern two outlets position themselves at 1/4 and two at 3/4. If a right-wing competitor enters at 5/6, for instance, in a new equilibrium, there will be two outlets and 1/6,
one outlet at 1/2 and the fourth outlet will join the entrant at 5/6. That is, most of
the outlets would move to the left in response to the right-wing entrant. We find the
opposite.
   Overall, we interpret this evidence and argumentation as going against market competition being a pivotal mechanism in our setting.
                    Table D.3: Reduced Form: Circulation and Fox News Position
                                Mechanisms: Effects on Circulation


                                                                Newspaper
                                                                Circulation
                                                             (1)        (2)        (3)

                   Fox News Channel Position              -0.011     0.013      0.009
                                                         (0.063)   (0.061)    (0.062)
                   MSNBC Channel Position                            0.002      0.008
                                                                   (0.034)    (0.030)

                   Observations                              718       718        718
                   State Fixed Effects                        ✓          ✓          ✓
                   Demographic Controls                       ✓          ✓          ✓
                   Channel Controls                                      ✓          ✓
                   Newspaper Language Controls                                      ✓
                   Historical Circulation Controls
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML) estimation. The main
explanatory variable is the Fox News channel position (standardized). The outcome is the newspaper’s
circulation. All specifications include state fixed effects and demographic controls. Additionally, column
(2) includes channel controls; column (3) further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4 lists all
control variables. We cluster standard errors at the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1).
                    Table D.4: Reduced Form: Circulation and Fox News Position
                                Mechanisms: Effects on Circulation


                                                               Newspaper
                                                               Circulation
                                                             (1)       (2)        (3)

                   Fox News Channel Position              0.011      0.013     0.012
                                                        (0.030)    (0.033)   (0.033)
                   MSNBC Channel Position                           -0.014    -0.014
                                                                   (0.035)   (0.036)

                   Observations                             608        608       608
                   State Fixed Effects                        ✓         ✓          ✓
                   Demographic Controls                       ✓         ✓          ✓
                   Channel Controls                                     ✓          ✓
                   Newspaper Language Controls                                     ✓
                   Historical Circulation Controls            ✓         ✓          ✓
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Observations are individual newspapers. All
estimates are obtained using Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML) estimation. The main
explanatory variable is the Fox News channel position (standardized). The outcome is the newspaper’s
circulation. All specifications include state fixed effects, demographic controls, and circulation before
the Fox News channel’s entry (in 1996). Additionally, column (2) includes channel controls; column (3)
further adds generic language controls. Appendix A.4 lists all control variables. We cluster standard
errors at the state level (in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).